Kai Moana, uh, who we will bring through now.
Kda, can you hear us Kda? Yes, we can.
And we can see you. So thank you
for joining us this morning.
You have 10 minutes with us, so we'll hand over to you
to make your introductions.
Thank you,
KDA. Well,
um, I'm the Oceans Manager here at
Ana, and sitting alongside me is Maria Lama,
and on the screen is Kayla Martin,
both technical experts within.
Um, as you may be aware, we are Ana.
We work on behalf of 58 mandated EWI organizations
recognize iwi organizations
and iwi aquaculture organizations who in turn represent iwi.
Throughout our interest in fast track approvals Amendment
Bill arises from our responsibility to protect
and enhance the rights and interests of iwi in aquaculture
and fisheries in a manner that furthers the agreements, um,
guaranteed under the deed of settlement
and assist the crown to discharge its obligations.
Um, we do not intend our response to conflict
or override any response provided by Iwi,
and we take our submission as read.
So we'll just go through our main points now.
So 0.1 is our, just our general concerns on the bill,
which is around reduced consultation with Iwi Hapu
during the referral stage.
We're concerned about the changes
to consultation requirements in Section 11.
The bill weakens existing protections
by replacing the requirement for application applicants
to actively consult with Iwi, hapu
and treaty settlement entities at the referral stage
with just a written notification, the timeframe to respond
to the written notification is also an issue.
Iwi and Hapu would only have 20 working days
to respond once they have received a written notification.
These changes risk reducing iwi
and Hapu involvement to a procedural formality.
They undermine iwi and hapu rights
and interest by limiting meaningful engagement in the early
stages of the process.
And this will make it difficult for our iwi organizations
to participate meaningfully in this process
while consultation requirements remain for groups with
or seeking cast marine title like nah,
or we believe
that current acts broader consultation
obligations should be retained.
Um, further to this under the
for government policy statement,
we are concerned about the changes
introduced through this statement.
This mechanism could be used
to prioritize politically favored projects,
including activities like seabed mining, regardless
of the environmental, cultural
or community impacts they may have, but iwi
and hapu, this creates a risk
as projects could proceed even whether they compromise Wahi
Tap or other culturally significant sites, simply
because they align with a minister's preference.
We want to see decision making remain independent.
The expert panel should retain clear authority
with a clear separation between politic political interests
and the expert panel's role, um, condensed timeframes
for the panel's decisions.
We are concerned that Clause 44 imposes a six fixed 60 day
working day deadline for expert panel decisions.
Regardless of the scale, complexity
or sensitivity of an application,
such a compressed timeframe,
risk prioritizing speed over substance,
it increases the likelihood that iwi rights
and interest along with environmental impacts will
not be fully considered.
We want expert panels to retain discretion over timeframes.
Each application at has unique complexities
and panels are best placed to assess how much time is needed
for them to make robust and fair decisions.
Point two is around customary non-commercial.
So in our 2024 submission on the fast track approvals bill,
we highlighted that the bill failed
to recognize customary non-commercial fishing rights
and the regulations.
We note that neither the existing bill this
or the app, sorry, provides meaningful
protection for these rights.
When assessing proposed applications without explicit
protections in the decision making framework.
We were concerned that customer non-commercial fishing
could be adversely affected.
We recommended adopting a framework similar
to the aquaculture decision regime
for all proposed projects in the coastal marine area
and the EZ one
that explicitly assesses whether a project would have an
undue adverse effect on Maori commercial, non-commercial
or commercial fishing rights,
taking environmental impacts into account.
What we recommend beyond that as well is ku ANA
and mandated iwi organizations should be invited
to co-design this framework for with officials.
Um, 0.3 is
around the Maori commercial aquaculture settlement interest
and our 2024 submission.
On the original Fast Track Approvals Act,
we set out several recommendations to strengthen the process
to better recognize and provide for
and actively support II in progressing their commercial
aquaculture aspirations.
Under this act, our recommendations focused on three key
areas, um, Maori agriculture rights
and interest in the EEZ, the increasing race for space
and identified since the ACT came into force.
The need to clarify how the fast track consents
for aquaculture interact
with the Aquaculture Settlement Act.
We wish to reiterate the importance
of addressing these matters
where possible throughout the Amendment.
Bill. In terms of the rights within the EZ,
the Aquaculture Settlement Act currently limits settlement
obligations to areas where regional council jurisdiction out
to 12 nautical miles offshore.
This is in line with the approach in the Resource Management
Act 1991,
under which marine consents agriculture activities can only
be applied for within the Coastal Marine area.
The 2024 Fast Track bill highlighted majorly to sort of gap
by creating a pathway for marine consents including Open
Ocean Act con culture within the EEZ, which sits
beyond the Regional Council Authority.
When the Aquaculture Settlement Act was developed,
the government stated that where aquaculture
goes, the settlement goes.
At that time, technology had not advanced to survive
beyond 12 nautical miles.
However, as technology has advanced, it's important
to uphold the intent of the settlement of
where aquaculture goes.
The settlement goes. This legislative gap retain remains.
Ana supports the growth of aquaculture,
but we would like to reiterate our position with matter
of settlement right and the EZ be addressed
before an applications for aquaculture
beyond 12 nautical miles per proceed, the race for space,
we remain concerned
that while the Aquaculture Act already contributes to a race
for space, the bill will intensify this pressure
by marking it easier to obtain consents increasing
competition for the limited number
of suitable aquaculture sites
within the coastal Marine area.
With the bill enabling faster
and more streamlined approvals,
most potential aquaculture sites have already been heavily
constrained by regional coastal plans,
environmental conditions or competing uses.
If development becomes more achievable under the bill demand
for the remaining suitable areas will inevitably negatively
increase this will disadvantage iwi, um,
and for the crown to uphold their obligations.
Um, suitable areas
for Maori aquaculture jail development must be preserved.
We therefore seek a clear commitment from the Crown
to identify, establish,
and maintain appropriate aquaculture settlements areas
that enable future development consistent with the intent
and obligations of the settlement Act.
Um, we also acknowledge
that this cannot be fully resolved within this bill,
but it is directly connected to the outcomes of the bill
and aimed that the bill aims to deliver.
For that reason, we've raised it here
and it must be considered alongside
finally clarifying the link between the Fast Track consents
for aquaculture activities
and the Aquaculture Settlement Act.
Since the FA Fast Track approvals came in 2024 came into
force, we have identified an additional issue in
how it interacts with Aquaculture Settlement Act
and the Resource Management Act of 1991.
We are seeking a minor
but urgent legislative amendment to confirm
that resource consents
for aquaculture activities granted under the Fast Track
Act meet the definition of new space
under the Aquaculture Settlement Act, and
therefore triggers a new space obligation.
This set issue arises from how coastal permits
for fast Track aquaculture activities commence
consents granted under the Fast Track Act,
commence under ACT Section nine seven
rather than under Section 1 1 16 A
of the Resource Management Act.
However, section four
of the Aquaculture Settlement Act defines new space.
A space that becomes first becomes subject
to a coastal permit that has commenced under section 1 1 1
of the RMA 1991.
This mismatched means fast track aquaculture permits may not
meet the statutory definition of new space,
leaving the matter open to legal interpretation,
which is a risk.
We are concerned that this lack of clarity creates
a real risk and the fast track agriculture activities may
not automatically trigger,
trigger a crown settlement obligation, which is contrary
to the act to resolve this.
We request the legislative amendment and have
provided, um, clauses within our, um, submission
and, uh, um, willing to work with Crown officials
to resolve that matter too.
Um, thank you for your time today.
Um, we'll, we'll leave it open to Carti from here.
Look, thank you very much.
Uh, really interesting submission
and some interesting points there.
Look, I will start with Rachel Brooking who has a question.
Thank you. And first of all, uh, thank you for, um,
providing some wording there that you think might, um, fix
that new space threshold issue
that you were just discussing,
and that that legislation is very complicated, so,
um, see what that might happen.
Uh, I was just wondering, right at the start
of your submission, you were talking about the timeframes
and becoming a procedural, a mere procedural formality
in terms of the response times.
Um, can you, have you been involved in any
response times under the current Fast Track
and were they appropriate or were they also too short
or were they about right?
Do you think in terms of being both fast
and avoiding just becoming a formality?
Yeah, we're currently involved with the, um,
chase Taman resources, um, fast Track, um, approvals,
re you know, process, and that has been quite fast moving.
Um, it has, it's not following a gen a normal
process I believe as well.
So it's having a hearings and things like that.
Um, it is a confusing and clunky process currently, um, and,
and quite unclear and that has, um, it's lucky that the iwi
of that region are so organized,
but it is quite short as it is, um, to try
and turn around, um, submissions
and get information, um, in the hands of, of iwi.
Thank you. Look, we've got time
for one last question from Land Farm
Koto. Thank you so
much for the submission.
Um, my question was just around, for those
of us on the committee who may not be as familiar
with the marine space, thank you for raising the, uh,
legislative gap as you call it,
about the agricultural settlement areas.
And I just was interested in just a little bit of context.
Has that concept being talked about for a long time
but no one's acted on it or,
or is that a sort of emerging
No. So there's provisions
within the existing settlement Act to,
um, for aquaculture
to preserve aquaculture settlement areas.
However, they're only retained for a certain amount of time,
whereas what we're asking for is for a broader scope of that
so that there isn't a necessarily
time limit on preserving those space that
that space for iwi.
Yeah, it gets quite technical in nature,
but we can follow up with some more detailed
response if you'd like as well. Yeah,
I'd be really interested in that. Thank you very much.
Ka, bye. Look, thank you very much
for your submission today.
We, you have met time, um,
some really interesting points there
and yes, um, it would be great if you could follow up
with some further information if members would like it.
Um, so thank you for your submission and time
Ka, bye.
Thank you. So moving on
to our next submitter this morning, uh,
the Mulligans Valley Protection Society, uh,
and we can see you've popped up there.
James, welcome to the select committee this morning.
Great to have you with us. Just
Good morning. See
You there. There we go. Good
Morning. Can you hear me? Yes,
We can hear you.
Uh, look, you've got 10 minutes with us this morning.
Uh, take your submission as read,
but we'll hand it over to you for your introductions.
Great, thank you very much.
Um, uh, I'll start by saying I am chairman
of the Milligans Valley Protection Society.
As a bit of background, this is a society of over 400 set up
and response to what we consider as an opportunistic, uh,
fast track development involving
amongst other things 780 residences
and an unsanctioned gondola over QE two protected land.
The development, um,
itself will be on highly sensitive lands.
Um, Mulligan's Valley Protection Society is also, uh,
concerned, um, itself at the commu cumulative effects
of now seven residential fast tracks that are proposed
for the Queenstown district.
Particularly given
that any appointed expert panel will only address the
substantive application in front of them, uh, I think
that Queenstown is unprecedented in terms of the number
of residential developments in in, in the area that's going,
that that is proposed in the area that is, uh, represented
by Queenstown districts.
Um, we are concerned that the amendment bill,
which has been pitched as a, uh, response to lack
of supermarket competition, will lead
to ministerial oversight
and reduced consultation requirements
and an acceleration for all application, uh,
types rather than just supermarkets.
Uh, government policy statements can be extended
beyond supermarkets and
therefore influence scope of responsibility
for expert panels when considering national
or regional economic benefits.
Government is in effect exerting control over the EPA
regarding its fast track functions and duties.
The new bill reduces mandatory consult consultation
obligations further to the RMA and to the existing act,
and we are concerned with that.
It should not just be councils
and iwi that are heard by an expert panel,
but also highly affected, um,
groups and individuals.
In the case of Coronate Village, for example, our society
and the six immediate neighbors that we represent
under the amendment bill would not have a right to be heard,
and this is very important.
In addition, the timeframe for invited persons
to provide comment being reduced from 20 days to 15
is unrealistic to provide a response given the timeframe
that will be spent preparing substantive applications
by the applicants themselves.
Finally, with regard to clause 54 in the insertion
of a new section 117, it is very important
that scope should also include reduced activities
and scale as well as enlarged activities and scale.
For instance, in the case of coronary village,
if the gondola is not included in the sub substative
application, as, as I've already said, it is unsanctioned,
this is a fundamental change in the application
and should be considered out of scope.
So in conclusion, we believe the bill is undemocratic
and so far it further reduces the ability for third parties
to be heard by expert panels.
It also has the unintended consequence
of not fully considering economic benefit
as originally intended by the fast tracked act.
Thanks, and I'm open to questions.
Thank you James. We'll go to Rachel Brooking first. Thanks
James. Just picking
up on
that statement you made about reducing the scope
and, uh, the application
of the gondola wasn't there for the village.
Can you explain, uh, to us how
that's relevant and thank you? Well,
In, in the, in the clause 54 in the, uh, new section 117,
it only talks about scope being considered if it is an
enlarged project as opposed to a reduced project.
And in the case of Corona Village is just an example,
we have a situation
where we believe the substantive application will not be
able to include if it, if it goes ahead, will not be able
to be include to include the gondola, which was critical
to the economic benefit argument associated
with that application.
So that would not be necessarily considered as being out
of scope because it is a reduction as opposed
to an enlargement of the application.
No, thank you. It was more the story of the gondola, uh,
which of then alluded to in terms of that
I might add, uh, that from, from our perspective,
I mean this application should not even be on schedule two
and as are some of the others.
And so far that the EPA told the advisory panel
that there had not been a permission consented for a,
over the QE two land and a neighboring property.
Uh, so therefore it failed to meet the criteria originally,
but as a result of merging schedule two A
and two B by, by the minister at that time,
we have a situation now where we have an application
that can go to substantive, uh,
when it should not even be on the, on the list.
But that's, that's,
that's me talking about the specific application
that we are, uh, in involved with.
Uh, I believe it happens in other, other situations as well.
Thank you. Uh, and we'll just have a last question from
Land Farm Qua James, thanks to you in the society for
bringing very clear examples of communities impacted
by these fast track projects.
And on that, my question is, you, you mentioned,
I think I heard correctly, you said 60 neighbors would
actually under this amendment bill
not have their voices heard.
Can you expand on that?
Are they, uh, adjacent properties
or directly under the area?
Can you let us know geographically? Yes.
Under the ACT itself, a society such
as Mulligans Valley Protection Society, uh, may not get hurt
by an expert panel.
However, the act does provide for immediate neighbors.
It was adjusted from the original drafting from adjacent
neighbors to immediate neighbors associated
with an application will be heard.
This amendment bill reduces that ability to be heard
by the expert panel to being specific to councils
iwi, uh, and I think broader societies like forest and bird
and so forth, but not immediate neighbors,
and that that is of that is of considerable concern.
I I might add one other final point.
So, so it is so that I can reiterate it.
The cumulative effects issue was brought up in a meeting
which we, where, where Chris Bishop attended us in
Queenstown and I raised with him then the cumulative effects
on a, uh, smaller, uh, district like Queenstown,
when you have so many opportunistic developments,
if I can use that word for residential developments,
so something like, uh, it will be close
to 9,000 new residences over
and above what has already been approved
through council planning that are outside the spatial plan,
that will lead to immense impacts on the infrastructure
of, of Queenstown.
Now each expert panel is not mandated
to consider the effects of their substantive application
against any other substantive application that might come
to, um, uh, to an expert panel.
Expert panels are looking at specific applications
and Chris Bishop himself accepted the fact that
a panel will not look necessarily at cumulative effects
and that is of concern to us as well.
Thank you so much. Demonstrating the key role
of council planning one might think.
Thank you.
Brilliant. Thank you very much James
for your submission today.
We appreciate your time, so you have a good day. Thank you.
Thank you for your time. Bye-bye.
So we will now, uh, introduce our next submitter, uh,
Greenpeace, Arta and Genevieve.
We can see you there.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have 10 minutes with us.
Take your submission as read
and we will hand it over to you.
Thank you Madam Chair
and members of the select committee, uh,
for the opportunity to be heard today.
My name is Genevieve Tupe
and I am submitting on behalf of Greenpeace Al
Greenpeace submits in full opposition
to the fast track approvals amendment bill
and urges the select committee to reject it.
Radical and egregious were the words used
by the parliamentary commissioner for the environment
to describe some of the changes proposed in this bill.
Before I outline why we agree with that assessment, I want
to ask the select committee to consider this question.
What does a truly prosperous al look like?
Is alua prosperous if families no longer have clean,
safe drinking water?
Because a minister in Wellington decided the national
benefit of an industry outweighed the costs
to the people living next door to that industry
is prosperous.
If our children can no longer swim in rivers that run clear,
but instead must watch them turn orange
and poisoned by acid mine drainage.
If ancient irreplaceable forests
and ecosystems fall silent
while Australian mining corporations like Bathurst resources
dig up climate killing coal
and leave devastated landscapes behind
is prosperous.
If the prophets of offshore mining companies
and their billionaire shareholders are allowed
to steamroll over our democratic rights.
When you strip away the spin about the price of groceries,
what you find is a bill that treats nature not
as an intrinsically valuable living system
on which our health, wellbeing and survival depends,
but treats nature as an obstacle to corporate profit.
When you look past the misleading statements about just a
series of technical adjustments, what you find is a bill
that treats public participation not as a cornerstone
of our democracy, but as a threat to corporate interests.
This bill in the words
of the New Zealand Law Society has been mischaracterized.
That's politely putting it,
it is a far-fetched proposition indeed to suggest
that New Zealanders will get cheaper butter
by changing the law.
So a cyanide filled tailings dam can be rubber stamped in a
tectonically active country
and just 60 working days with no public
or independent external experts input allowed.
It is a bit of a stretch of the imagination to suggest
that a toxic tailings dam
that will forever threaten the rivers farmland
and communities downstream is somehow going
to stop supermarkets being legally allowed
to rip off New Zealanders every day to the tune
of 1 million in excess profits.
But hey, if the minister decrees in an evidence free
government policy statement that toxic tailings dams
and the open cast minds sitting behind them is
of national benefit to groceries,
then we in the panels better believe it.
That is what this bill is asking us to do.
This bill, which is designed to ensure
that the most contentious
and ecologically reckless projects proposed in our recent
history get their fast track approvals no matter what,
no matter that they might cause irreversible harm
to nature no matter what hapu local communities
and the public have to say about it.
And we are not having this conversation
from a good starting point.
This bill seeks to make changes
to the already deeply anti-democratic
and antina fast track approvals act, the act
that enables activities prohibited under the RMA suppresses
public participation, steamrolls over our environmental law,
and even gives mining companies another chance
at projects so eal, they have been rejected
by the Supreme Court projects like Trans Tasman
resources decade long bid to mine, the South Taranaki bite
and the habitat of critically endangered Maui dolphin
and against the clear opposition of local iwi,
hapu and community.
So to some of the most egregious changes proposed
to this already egregious act, the love letter clause,
clause five would give ministers the power to by decree,
declare a group of projects beneficial by writing
what is essentially a love letter to them.
Called here in the bill government policy statement
as the PCE noted, these statements have no guardrails.
They don't need to contain evidence,
they don't require public consultation.
They don't have to mention environmental damage, the costs
or the impacts on treaty rights.
Clause 48 then goes further by allowing the minister
to direct the EPA on how to do its job.
These clauses strip away independence
and put political interference right at
the heart of the process.
They're an attempt by ministers to claw back some
of the power the public forced them
to rescind in the original act.
If ministers are given the power
to both predetermine the benefits of projects
and influence the agency administering the process,
the integrity of the process evaporates
decision making must be insulated from the influence
of corporate money and corporate lobbying panels must be
free of political interference to robustly
and independently consider the projects
and panels must also have the time to adequately assess
complex high risk proposals.
Yet this bill proposes to slash the time available
for panels and give them just 60 working days
to assess the projects, which is an unworkable timeframe
for large complex proposals with potentially
for unforeseen severe and long-term environmental impacts.
Then there is public participation
already severely curtailed under the Act.
Clause 33 further restricts panels from inviting anyone
other than local authorities to provide comment on projects
unless that authority explicitly states they won't
address in an issue.
This shuts out the groups
who often have the most relevant expertise.
Hapu environmental organizations, scientists
and local communities who understand the places at stake
clause 50 removes their right to appeal
to the high court on point of law.
And on top of this, clause six removes the requirement
for applicants to consult iwi
and hapu in the application stage.
They would only have to notify them
and finally to one of the most brazen amendments Clause 56,
which allows corporate applicants to object
to specific panel members.
They don't like letting corporations essentially pick their
own judges leaves no doubt about
who this government is stacking the odds for.
It's like letting the wallabies choose their own referee in
a match against the All Blacks.
We wouldn't consider that fair in sports.
So why would we consider it fair in our democracy?
This bill tries to hand power to ministers
and corporate applicants while shutting out New Zealanders
from having a say over the biggest, most controversial,
most damaging projects of our generation.
You might recommend this bill be passed.
You might be comfortable further suppressing the public
and steamrolling our environmental laws
to give formal consent to ecologically reckless projects,
but you cannot by ministerial decree or
otherwise manufacture the social license
to operate in this country.
And like resource consent, social consent is also required.
In closing, Greenpeace al urges the select committee
to reject this bill
and instead focus on building a truly prosperous
with an enduring consent regime that has nature,
democracy and or wgi at its heart.
Thank you.
Thank you Genevieve for that, uh, passionate contribution.
Uh, look, we've only got time for maybe one
or two questions, so we'll go first to Priyanka.
Um, thank you Genevieve.
Thank you for your very strong submission.
Um, I just have one very simple question.
Um, if this was, uh, an amendment bill, a bill that
that was actually just focused on grocery,
increasing grocery competition
and didn't have all of the egregious clauses
that you have outlined your objection to,
would you then support that bill?
Um, I'd like to take this opportunity to restate
that Greenpeace opposes the Fast Track Approvals Amendment
Act, uh, the Fast Track Approvals Act, um,
because as I mentioned in the presentation,
that act already steamrolls our environmental laws
and allows incredibly ecologically problematic projects, um,
to apply for fast track consent, um,
and allows activities prohibited under the RMA to go ahead.
So, um, to, to suggest that, um, the, uh,
changes to that act that could, uh, make it better.
Um, yeah, there could be, which would be repealing it
that would make the fast track approvals act better.
And that's what we suggest to any government
who is serious about protecting nature
and our democracy would do is repeal the
Fast Track Approvals Act.
Thank you look time
for one last quick question from Land Farm.
Genevieve, thank you for that submission.
Um, my question is just about the bigger picture
where Greenpeace has, you know,
had an eye on government policy,
particularly in the environmental space
for many, many years.
Where does this bill fit in that
spectrum of what you've seen?
Um, because one would presume that there was a duty of care
for any government, no matter colors
or stripes to protect the environment,
and yet we are not seeing that in this bill.
Any thoughts on that?
I think we're certainly not seeing any duty of care
to protect or safeguard the environment for this
or future generations in this bill
or in the act that it seeks to change.
And, um, this Thursday is the second year anniversary
of this government, um,
and we've released a timeline of the acts of, uh,
assaults on nature
that this government has committed in that time.
It runs to over 20 pages.
Um, this government has been waging a war on nature
and the Fast Track approvals act, uh, we see
as a cornerstone in that assault, um, on the natural world
that is being, uh, waged by this, uh, government.
Look. Thank you very much, uh, Genevieve
for that contribution.
Of course, there are many members that, uh, would disagree
with, uh, some of those comments that you've made
around the war on nature,
but, um, appreciate your submission
and, uh, your thoughts and views.
So, uh, thank you for your time today.
Thank you. Uh, now moving through
to our next submission, uh, which is from Central
Otago District Council, Otago Regional Council,
Queenstown Lakes District Council.
Good. I there. Yes, we can see you there. Connor.
Thank you for joining us today.
You have 10 minutes with us this morning,
so take your submission as read.
Um, okay. Obviously a very thorough submission here,
so we'll hand it over to you
to talk us through some of the main points.
Thank you.
Okay, look, thank you very much, uh, for the opportunity
to speak to the, uh, select committee.
Um, the two councils, uh, requesting
that the government amend the amendment bill to enable, uh,
inclusive zoning, uh, only in the Central Otago region
and the Queenstown Lakes District Council, um, region.
Uh, so as a sub, as the uh, submission points out, uh,
there's about 8,000 sections, uh,
in consent being requested for consents, uh,
through the fast track amendment bill,
sorry, through the fast track bill.
And what this looks to do is what has been done in the past,
and that is where 5% of those, um,
sections would be put aside
and given to the housing trust, the local housing trust, uh,
which means the cost of the land
for affordable housing is taken out of the equation.
And this is what enables, uh,
affordable housing to be offered.
And this is what has been offered in Queenstown.
And Anita, who's on the on on this call, will, will,
will, will talk through that.
Um, if the bill isn't amended, it means
that these 8,000 sections will go through
and there will not be the opportunity for about 400 sections
to be given to the local housing trust.
And this will mean that the extreme, um, problem
with affordability in that region
will not be addressed at all, um, uh, around these, uh,
8,000 sections.
So we would encourage, um, the committee to
read the submission carefully and agree with this
and make the amendment because it will make a difference.
It will shift the dial, uh,
and it'll make a difference
for the whole community down there,
and it's supported by the whole community.
So I'll pass over to Anita, uh, to, um,
just explain a we bit about the trust,
Uh, kilda. My name's
Anisha Vanstone
and I'm the strategic growth manager
for Queenstown Lakes District Council.
So oc, um, OC Hall has faced years of affordable, um,
issues despite being one of the highest releases
of building consents per thousand residents.
And our total numbers of building consents are only
surpassed by Auckland and Christchurch.
We have 30 plus years worth of zoning.
Um, but, uh, the combined demands of our population,
second homes and investment property, short-term leading
and for physical constraints, particularly in the PU mean
that it's, it's really hard for a
to keep up with those demands.
And lots of those are demands are coming from within
New Zealand, Australia, and overseas.
And from overseas. And what years of, um, uh,
studies have shown
as a supply solution alone will not
address affordable housing.
And we need to look at what's been happening overseas.
And what's happened overseas is the creation
of a secondary market.
So a way to achieve this is through a tried
and tested value capture mechanism for affordable housing
where 5% of the land is, um,
all fi equivalent financial contribution
is given to the trust.
And really the, the, the value is captured at the time
of moving from rural to urban zoning.
It is protected by a deed.
So that piece
of land remains affordable housing and perpetuity.
It is managed by a trust, uh, registered, um,
community housing provider.
And we've also, um, through past, um, experience,
we've secured over $55 million worth of contributions
with another $50 million in the pipeline.
However, we've lost that mechanism to secure that,
and that was through the housing cords
and Special areas act so that no longer exists.
So what we're asking is for amendments to be made so
that we can use an, a tried
and tested tool to enable the, um, the, the security
of perpetual affordable housing in our community.
So this is a real u unique opportunity to build on
that success and have quality affordable housing.
So we have currently 1500 people households on our waiting
list, so getting that 389.
And what we know from talking to our development, um,
community is there is a number
of other large residential developments on the pipeline.
So this will be a game changer for our community
and also it would be a, a way to really secure affordable,
quality, affordable housing and perpetuity.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Look, we've got a flurry
of questions, so we will start with Rachel Brooking.
Okay. Uh, thank, thank you for this
and I'm lucky to have visited many of the housing trusts,
uh, projects and, um, know the issues.
Well, uh, couple of questions though.
Do you think, um,
and we've heard already that Queenstown has an enormous
amount of fast track projects in in your area.
Uh, do you think there should be a threshold for this kind
of provision to apply to other areas that have met, uh,
that might also be subject to a whole lot
of fast track applications in the future?
That's one question. And then the second one is, uh,
you talked there about the housing accords
and special purposes areas act.
Um, is the legis, is the wording that you've proposed
very similar to that or is it different?
Um, and also is the wording you've pro proposed similar to
what was being, um,
consult consulted on in Queenstown at least,
uh, a year or so ago?
Would, if you could explain
how it differs or doesn't differ?
Yeah, co Perhaps I'll give an answer.
The first question is that, um, the, the, uh, the multiple
of income to to cost of housing is 12 in Queenstown,
the average in the country is six.
Um, the average house price is 1.6 million.
Um, it's the highest cost of housing, it's the highest rent.
Um, there's nowhere else in the country
that comes anywhere close to the problem.
So this is specifically
and only, uh, targeted for the Otago central region.
And in terms of the wording, um, it's a pragmatic wording
that has the effect of what we're trying to get, which is
to ensure that the 8,000, um,
sections are required to provide 5% of their sections
to the housing trust.
So how that compares with previous legislation, uh,
frankly I have no idea.
I I can answer that Connor.
Um, so, um, essentially under the hatcher,
it didn't actually have anything in specifically in the
wording, but what we did is we had a lead policy.
So this really fundamentally captures what
and also lessons learn.
Um, so in our lead policy, one of the requirements,
so when a developer would come in
and say, look, I would want to have a special housing area,
we would say, how are you going to commit to affordability?
And so one of them would be actually 5% would,
or 5% eventually to 12.5% was provided to the trust.
So what we did is we entered into that
and then we would enter into a separate agreement.
So a lot of what the wording here has really built on, um,
the lessons learned and for instance, having clear triggers
and those types of things, but it really replicated
what we did as part of that lead policy.
So in terms of our inclusion rehousing plan change, no,
this is a simplified version.
So what this is really doing is trying to capture
that value, that value uplift specifically
for large greenfield developments.
So obviously that resource consent.
So when you're moving from rural to urban, capturing some of
that significant because in Queenstown Lakes it is a
significant value uplift, like, um,
a massive amounts of value up.
So capturing 5% of that value uplift
and then reinvesting it back into our communities is an form
of perpetual affordable housing.
Now through the er, what we've found is
that did not impact the feasibility or the quality
or the supply of housing in those areas.
So we've really,
so this is just really building on the success of that.
Thank you, Anita.
Look, we'll now go to Ryan Hamilton for a question.
Thanks. Um, you just answered one of my questions
around margins
and feasibility, which is great, really well aware of your,
um, I guess exemplar project, uh, on Hamilton City Council.
We were watching you guys with interest.
Um, so my question would be, does this need to be legislated
through this fast track a amend amendment bill,
or can you not just make it a consent, uh, condition
through your local council?
Just really seeking that clarity?
Yeah, so, uh, con I can answer that.
Y no, we can't, um, we don't have any, um,
there's no legislative pathway.
So what the hatcher did is it gave us an opportunity,
so we were able to utilize that
to secure the affordable housing.
Right now, we have no mechanism
to enforce developers to provide that.
So you'll notice that from the, some of the fast tracks, two
of the, um, proposals have volunteered agreements
with the trust already, and I think that's
around 53 sections.
So that's the Gibson one
and also the, um, Mount Iron, um, fast track.
So they have, but that's only voluntary basis.
So no, there is no mechanism currently
to require this to happen.
Okay, thank you. And a question from Celia Wade Brown
Kia, um, ua, lovely to see you Connor,
and I love your background, Anita.
Um, I just wondered
these different fast track developments, as I understand it,
do not necessarily fit with the spatial plan
are mostly greenfield.
And I'm just wondering about the issue of location
of affordable housing in some of those, frankly sort
of enclaves of wealth, which I'm not objecting to having
high-end housing, but I'm just wondering whether those are
the most sensible places to have workers housed, given
housing is part of the cost,
but transport is another part of the cost of living.
So is
that why you've said the alternative is the monetary value,
so that perhaps it would be more appropriate
to have housing developments more centrally?
So just talk me through how that would work,
but I do commend you on being interested in making
affordable housing happen.
Yeah, so I can answer that.
Um, Celia, so not, so some
of the fast tracks are actually within
our spatial plan area.
So Homestead Bay, that was about 2,500
to two 800 Silverlight.
Um, and then there is also I think, um,
Mount Iron is just outside of the spatial plan here,
but located very close.
So some are actually, um, very close
and some are further apart, but yes, that is why.
So it's the option.
Um, so for instance, there is a couple
that are potentially high end, you know,
when luxury visitor, uh, residential units
or visitor accommodations.
So maybe in that instance it is more appropriate
to give a financial contribution.
But what I mean the, the, this is just an opportunity
to really gather just some of that uplift that all
of them will, will be making from that rural to urban
and just reinvesting it.
So I think, um, in many instances with the er, most
of them did give land so that, yeah, it's just having that,
um, that that option to either give land or
or fi equivalent financial contribution.
The key to the success of the trust is having that pipeline
of land, um, and that's the critical factor.
That means the land is not worth, you know,
you're taking out the cost of the land to the future owners,
and those owners are either own the house or,
or rent, rent the house.
Cheers. That's great. Look, thank you Anita
and Connor, we are gonna have to leave it there.
We've, we've gone over time
and we have other submitters waiting,
but, uh, look, some really interesting considerations there
and, and appreciate that really thorough, um, submission
that you have made for us to consider. So thank you.
Thank you, thank You very much.
So moving on now to our next submitter this morning, uh,
zero waste and I can see you there, Sue, welcome
to the committee this morning.
Uh, you have 10 minutes with us, so we'll hand over to you
to make your introductions.
Oh, good morning and thanks so much for making the time
to hear our feedback on these proposals.
Uh, for those of you who haven't, um,
come across us at Zero Waste Delta Roy yet, uh,
we we're people who care about our environment,
care about our local people,
and, um, we're also business people.
So we employ about, um, 1200 people across the country turn,
uh, recover and recycle about 44,000 tons of material
and involved in reuse
and behavior change programs with our communities
and turn over about 87 million.
So we have an interest in all the different aspects of life.
Um, we don't support the amendments proposed in this bill
and others have done a great job of speaking to the detail.
Some have, you know, put some detail there in our
submission, but I specifically wanted
to focus on the real risk that these proposals will, um,
not adequately be, enable us
to consider the complex proposals
that we're seeing coming forward for things like rubbish
incinerators, waste to energy plants,
advance chemical recycling, and, um,
and other waste to energy, um, activities.
They could easily be fast tracked without due consideration
of environmental social health and economic impacts.
Uh, the current fast track we consider as inadequate
for this purpose and the amendments would weaken it further,
um, by, you know,
fast track processes don't really make sense
for projects which are novel,
where you have new technological approaches, like
that's the case in New Zealand for incineration,
chemical recycling, plastics to fuel, et cetera,
where we don't have those things operating now
and we would require, um, updates
to our regulatory framework, new standards, uh,
better compliance monitoring enforcement, et cetera.
So there's a lot of complexity that would need
to be taken care of in the background for these proposals
to be able to be effectively managed and monitored.
Um, and it also doesn't really work
for highly contested projects
where you have strong diverse perspectives on the costs
and the risks and the impacts
because that's when you really need an inclusive process
with good representation
and adequate, um, you know, good representation on the,
in the panel to be able to really get buy-in
for the outcomes, you know, so that the decisions
that we make in New Zealand around our infrastructure
and the projects that we're progressing are long lasting
and everyone has some feeling that, uh, you know,
we're all on the same page.
Um, we all know that we need to find better ways of building
and paying for infrastructure and services,
but going faster isn't gonna give us
better quality decisions.
Um, the evidence shows that brushing in the early stages,
especially with these complex projects, just pushes cost
and risk garden to other stages of the project's life.
And that's because you're often using arbitrary rules
of thumb instead of, you know, decent cost benefit analysis
or real consideration of what the future impacts might be.
It's really good to remember that a lot of these proposals
that are being put up, um, are just sales pitches.
You know, they're not a detailed cost benefit analysis
that's being put together with the public good in mind.
Um, the ones we see coming through our sector, um,
we've been involved with several of the big
and, you know, incinerator proposals
that have come into New Zealand the last few years.
They often, um, you know, have a healthy dose of greenwash.
They overstate the benefits
and they under understate the costs and risks.
Um, and we think there's a real risk
that we'll see the ministers, like we see some
of the local government people being drawn in
by the sales pitch, they'll create a government policy
statement, you know, which is, um, you know, used
to influence the decision making process about a particular
activity without really digging into
and understanding the consequences.
Um, the advanced chemical recycling facilities
that we're seeing coming in around the world
and the plastic to plastic plants, they're being proposed,
but they're largely experimental
and they, um, there's a lot of issues still
with economic viability and with the safety of the outputs
and the processes themselves.
So these sort of things need to be carefully considered.
You know, you guys all be aware that we have a lot of issues
with con contaminated land in New Zealand already.
Um, we've got a lot of sites across all Tower Road
that are needing to be cleaned up.
They're being contaminated by chemicals
and byproducts are far from past environ,
um, industrial activity.
And the cost of those cleanups is
generally born by the taxpayer.
And the rate payer, um,
investment in the cleanups is now starting
to seriously impact our ability
to invest the waste disposal levy money into proactive
and, um, constructive, um, you know,
infrastructure and services.
And as you'll all be aware, there's been a big chunk
of the waste disposal levy fund that we collected
for waste minimization, which has now been devoted to, um,
into cleanups and decontamination work.
So, you know, that means we're, um, going into a situation
where rather than investing in the future,
we're busy cleaning up the past.
We think that fast tracking, you know,
speeding up decision making involving less people in the
decision making, having, um, you know, the ability
to exclude some people as, as panel members
because they might be, you know, the, the wrong sort
of people in terms of the panel, in terms
of the applicant's perspective, um, will really, you know,
create more issues for us than it solves.
And we just can't afford to give the green light to projects
that create more problems than they, than they solve.
So that's, you know, I just wanted to raise that part
of the issue, um, with you.
I see there's a lot of people on the list that'll be talking
about some of the other more generic things,
but yeah, thanks so much for the opportunity
to speak to you today about that.
No, thanks Sue, and thanks for that, you know,
different perspective in terms of the,
the waste side of things.
Um, look, Rachel Brooking has a question first for you.
Thank you. Thanks, Sue.
Hey, you've talked about novel applications
and that we don't have standards for things in New Zealand,
but also spoken about incineration projects.
Yeah. And how do you, how would you, what would you say, um,
to people who would say, well, those,
those projects aren't novel worldwide.
Um, they're known about.
Can you talk us
through why you think it's different in the New Zealand
situation and what's missing here
and, uh, why 60 days would be a problem?
I think that the problem we have here is there's not
really, uh, anybody with a lot of expertise in how,
what the impacts of these, the real impacts
of these projects are, what the technical
processes are that they use.
When you get an application come through, there's thousands
of pages of information in those documents.
Uh, we generally have to go offshore to find somebody
who can actually make sense of some of the claims,
understand whether the plants that they're referring to
as their base cases are real or not.
Often you'll find that the plant they're saying is,
you know, an amazing example of something overseas.
Turns out not to have started to have started,
but have failed to have, you know,
and so doing that background work takes time and energy.
It also requires somebody who has, you know, a lot of the,
the language is very technical,
the chemical process is very technical,
and there's also the whole story of the economics.
We're seeing a lot of these plants fall over
around the world, um, once they have been started
because the economic case doesn't stack up.
And I think in New Zealand, we have to be very careful.
We've only got, um, you know, we can't afford
to be a test case for experimental technology.
We really need to be coming along going, okay,
this is a good solution for us.
This is something that's gonna work for the next 30 years.
We know the infrastructure commission is looking out at
least 30 years with our investment plan.
You know, we've got to be really thoughtful
and careful about which pro projects we pick out
of the bundle of projects that are possibilities
and make sure that we are going for the ones
that are gonna give us good positive outcomes for the future
and not leave us with problems to clean up in 30 years time.
Thank you. Look, time
for one last question from Land Farm.
So thank you so much for that submission.
Mission is just really an extension of that
because you mentioned like the potential harmful impacts.
Yeah. Taking waste and consideration just as one example.
What are those potential harmful impacts
that, you know, essentially we just have very little
knowledge and expertise about?
Well, I guess there's two things I'd mention.
Um, one is the, um, you know, when you burn plastics
and other materials, you do have a lot, there's a lot
of chemicals involved in the
production of those, um, things.
We don't know what harm those
chemicals will cause in the future.
Uh, they, none, A lot of them are reasonably new entities.
We don't really know what the harm will be,
but there's good evidence from around the world
that the areas surrounding incinerator plants,
whether they're in, you know, uh,
quite modern plants in Holland
or France, there's good evidence that there's contamination
of land, suburban land all around those facilities.
Um, so we wouldn't want to, uh, we know that Fonterra, um,
put a submission in against the plant in, um, ttu
because they were concerned about the impacts
of dioxin on their, on their supply chain.
Um, they didn't wanna have any dioxin contamination
of their agricultural products.
And I think the second thing to remember is
that when somebody comes
to your country saying they're gonna spend three, four,
or $500 million, it's not a gift they're going to get,
they wanna get that money back and more,
and so they wanna return on that investment.
So you have to remember that if someone's coming
to your community saying, oh,
we've gonna build you this great big incinerator,
you're gonna be paying through the nose for that over time,
and you're gonna be paying for something which is a disposal
solution rather than a positive, um, solution,
which is maybe perhaps more in line with the sort of things
that communities are looking for in terms of reuse,
composting, et cetera.
So it's really a very, you know, um, you know,
it looks like you're getting this great deal
where someone's saying, oh,
we're gonna invest in your community,
but the reality is your community is gonna be,
you are locking yourself in for the long term, um,
to be paying them back every dollar
that they've put in plus massive return on investment.
Look, thank you very much, Sue. We have met time.
We really appreciate, uh, those insights today
and your submissions, so thank you.
Oh, thanks so much for taking the time.
You guys really appreciate it.
Have a good day. See you soon.
Bye. Uh, now we will bring
through our next submitter, uh, St.
Peter's on Willis Social Justice Group. And there we go.
Gail, uh, I believe we can see you.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have 10 minutes with us, so we'll hand over to you.
Uh, thank you Catherine,
for this opportunity to speak this morning.
Uh, the social Justice group opposes this bill
and I am inviting Steven Jenkins a social justice group
member to speak on our behalf.
And to this is Steven Jenkins.
Good morning and thank you for the opportunity.
Our initial written submission raised two particular
questions, one related to the health
and safety requirements for new projects
that could be approved under the Fast Track Amendment rules.
We also expressed some concern about ministerial pressure
that could be brought to bear that was neatly summarized
by the Honorable Minister of Finance in the statement,
we are on your side
and we will get rid of anything
that may be standing in your way
that is within the control of the government.
While this was specific to the improvement
of competition in the grocery trade,
it does express the power
that ministers see within the fast track process
and seems to be a specific expression of the intent
of the legislation.
St. Peter's all Will of Social Justice Group's
organizational goal is to speak for the least, the last
and the lost, who do not have the skills or capacity
and time or resources to make their voices heard.
In forums like this one,
I'm a professional engineer with significant project
and consulting experience across many industries.
I'm not an expert in environmental law or indeed in any law,
but I have some concerns about the sequential definition
of the ministers who have power
to apply the quoted philosophy to projects.
Going through the fast track process
in the original Resource Management Act,
relevant ministers were generally accepted to be those
with responsibility for
and ministry officials with knowledge
of an area directly related by a proposed consent.
In the original consent legislation,
this became a relevant minister
in the Fast Track Amendment proposed this
becomes any minister.
Part of our concern is the asymmetric power
of government against concerned and interested citizens
or organizations who may be sidelined, but have significant
or relevant points to make.
I am also concerned that under the Regulatory Standards Act,
the Minister for Regulations has a very broad brief,
which I believe could be extended
to represent relevance in virtually any application.
Does the Regulatory Standards Act empower him
to act in areas in which he holds Associate minister roles?
For example, of particular concern is the power given
to the minister to recommend recommendations
that modify local planning rules
where they may affect nationally important proposals in
the Resource Management Act.
Such power coupled with the ability now given
to issue apparently binding national policy statements in
the proposed Fast track bill must be take
that must be taken into account by expert panels, seems
to contradict the statement
that the expert panel makes decisions independently.
We encourage the select committee to explore this
as it does seem to be a significant interconnection
between legislation strengthening the powers
of government ministers.
The second issue we raised was the question of health
and safety with respect to projects which were consented
through the fast Track process In the recommendations on
this legislation was clarification recommended that
in the case of an applicant for a tier one permit to mine,
the proposed permit operation has
or is highly likely to have
by the time the relevant work in any granted
permit is undertaken.
The capability and statement
and systems that are likely to be required
to meet the health and safety requirements
of all specified acts as specified in Section 21
of the Crown Minerals Act, 1991 for the types
of activities proposed under the permit.
End of quote, there are currently proposals
for a large gold mine in the hills of central Otago
with a correspondingly large tailings dam,
which will last forever.
The tailing dam failures are a regular occurrence
and in a seismically active country
with increasing high energy weather events are almost
certainly unable to last forever.
In each of the three last, the last three decades to 2019,
there were 12 tailing dam failures in each decade
around the world classified as very serious involving loss
of life and major pollution.
I encouraged the Slic Committee
to consider hard facts like this against the possibility
that a major mine could be established under fast track
approval with little input from interested
and independent parties on the associated risk.
Gathering information from parties
who have suffered from a tailings dam collapse is difficult,
as many of them are dead.
A live example of a consented project,
which probably would've passed the highly likely
to have the systems that are required to meet health
and safety requirements of all specified acts,
was the Pike River Mine, which was sealed up with the bodies
of 29 miners entombed as a result of a mine explosion,
which should have been presented prevented by the health
and safety requirements at the time.
New Zealand does not need fast track disasters
that will affect innocent bystanders.
In the case of tailings dam failures
or workers in our industries, well controlled
and environmentally safe developments
with well-planned processes
and precau protections for the health
and safety of well-paid workers are the foundation
of a prosperous fear.
And just society projects rushed through planning,
particularly where that planning can be consented in stages
and the projects locked in before all social
and environmental consequences have been identified
and resolved satisfactorily are not conducive
to a prosperous fair and just society.
There are likely to have been unintended
and unmitigated effects on our workers
and our commons of air, water,
and coastline that will not be considered
by the process being used
to accelerate the claimed economic benefits to the citizens
of New Zealand as proposed in this legislation.
Um, thank you very much Steve,
to conclude the social justice group of St.
Peters on Willis recommends to this committee
that the fast track approvals amendment
bill does not proceed.
Thank you.
Thank you Gail.
And Steven, look, we have a question from Celia Wade Brown.
Ken, um, thank you for your submission.
I want, I have two short questions for you.
Do you think that under the guise of cheaper groceries
that this bill actually prioritizes corporate profit
over our unique environment?
And the second is particularly to your submission,
do you think the native species at risk
of extinction potentially fall into that grouping the least?
The last, the lost as well as the wor workers who
are at risk of fast track disasters?
Responding to your first question, I think, uh, is
probably beyond my brief and my capacity.
Um, but the statement struck me
and struck the rest of our group as particularly pointed.
Um, the grocery problem is one that I think is very deep
and very difficult in terms of do we
represent species subject to extinction to the extent that,
uh, humanity is probably on a pathway that is leading
to at least difficulty in survival.
Um, I think we speak for them and we speak for the species.
Thank you. Look, thank you very much Gail
and Steven for your submission today.
We appreciate, uh, you coming along this morning
and uh, yeah, you have a good day.
Thank you. Thank you. Bye.
So we will now welcome through our next submitter, um,
the Corman Watchdog of Hoki,
and I understand
that Catherine Delahunty is also joining us.
Good morning, Catherine and Augusta.
Uh, Brilliant.
You have 10 minutes with us, so we will hand over to you
for your opening remarks.
Thank you very much, Catherine.
Um, and it's great to be here.
I my role is as chair of Corman Watchdog, uh, group
that I've been in for 45 years.
Um, and Augusta has been our coordinator
for, I don't know, nearly 10.
So we, we have a very long
and specific relationship with the law, uh,
from the Resource Management Act
formation right through to this moment.
And so we are the lived experience of what it's like
to be on the receiving end of laws.
And I do wish, as a former parliamentarian
that laws were based on do no harm as medicine is supposed
to be first do no harm.
Because I think if you, you heard Sue Coots this morning,
what you heard was potential cost of future generations.
And we wanna talk specifically about our experience
with the Fast Track and this amendments,
because we are living it every single day at the moment.
So where our, our, our group, we are involved
with the Yhe North Project,
which is the first private profit, um, project, is not
for community infrastructure.
There is no long term benefit to the community in terms
of infrastructure under the fast track.
So this one is in the middle of the process,
and we will talk about it in terms of what has been proposed
for the amendments, because it's difficult enough
and you're about to make it worse, if this goes through,
the Parliament is about to make it considerably worse.
It is not. Um, I have listened to a lot of the submitters.
So the Wahi North, um, project, um, is the first,
it's like a test case for how much private, um,
companies can get through this process.
It isn't even needing to be under the fast track.
And that part of the, the mine project there,
there will not be mining for nine years.
Part of it, which is in the conservation,
under the conservation land that's proposed the project,
they actually have nine more years of expiration.
And they're basing it on the fact
that they have no data on water,
but will be using those years to try
and collect some not independent water data.
These things are happening
because they were going through the RMA,
but then as soon as the fast track was put up, they chose
to jump out of community processes
and RMA processes for their benefit.
And it isn't even going to happen part of it
for a very long time.
So actually it's not a fast track.
It's being misused apart from the fact
that the fast track itself is a bad idea.
So I don't agree. I listened to Simon Optum's submission
and I don't agree that the fast track
as it is under the current law is working well, working well
for whom this,
the question the select committee's gotta ask itself,
for whom is this law working?
Because we've just been engaging under ex in the existing
framework, and we had 20 working days
to respond and what by respond because we were included
and under these proposed amendments,
we will probably not be,
because if our councils are engaged, we won't be we
who educate our councils every day about mining
because actually they don't know much about it.
They really don't. They're not,
the local council has no background in mining.
We have 45 years background.
So we are in the situation where we are actually having
to develop a, a process of engagement, which is allowing us
to comment since when the democracy be defined
by your right to comment.
So we challenge the fundamental basis of this previous law,
but also, um, next, the, the proposals that you're going
to do, um, I'm just gonna try
and make sure that I give space for Augusta
to talk about some specifics,
but we specifically,
you've heard a lot about the ministerial, um, statements,
you know, that is just promoting ministerial bias
into a legal process that is supposed to be independent.
There's nothing independent about the,
the government dictating how national
and regional benefit will be defined.
But one of the reasons we think that it's in the new law
that national and regional development will be part
of these statements is
because the panels, despite all the limitations,
we're actually asking questions about what they meant.
And if they couldn't be proven
because, say for example, wahi North put up
economic evidence with absolutely no cost benefit analysis
only benefit as beautifully described by Sue Ktz as a way
of marketing their proposal, we are supposed to accept that.
So when you make it even harder for pe for the panels
to be independent, you are doing them a disservice.
But you are also doing the rest of us a disservice
who have spent thousands
and thousands of hours creating money to pay experts
to be allowed to comment.
Our expertise in our community is deep,
and we feel that this is one
of the most disrespectful amendment bills we've ever seen
based on a bill that it's in itself had no public, um,
license, no social license.
Do you wanna add to this forecast
before I, um, get carried away?
Sure. So I would, um, just pick up on
that point about the benefit test.
We mentioned this in our submission.
Um, you know, for, for us, a,
an application should be considered on its merits,
not on a ministerial opinion
of whether an industry is significant.
So in theory, the minister could say
that mining is a sign national nationally significant, and
therefore applications pass that test.
We would really like to see applications considered on their
merits in that case, and we would like
to see the panels entrusted with the ability
to make those calls for themselves,
because that's in theory the idea
of having panels making the decisions
and not ministers making the decisions.
So for us, this just seems to be a really big step back
to one of the things that was originally proposed
with the Fast Track Approvals Act, which was scrapped
after the incredible public outcry of that, um,
that independent assessment
of applications we think is, you know, it's vital.
It's vital to good law making, it's vital to, um,
good politics as well in the sense
of maintaining independence of our politicians
and their ability to keep that independence.
Um, local knowledge
and expertise that should be kept at the discretion
of the panel if the panel feels that
that information is important.
For example, as Catherine said, with our 45 year history,
we quite possibly are in a stronger position
to comment on some aspects
of an application than a council might be.
And if the panel feels that that would be worth inviting
that comment and it would help them
to make an informed decision, we really think that
that should be supported, um, within that legislation.
Getting to the point of expertise outside of local,
local knowledge and expertise, which I, as,
as an organization like Watchdog,
we don't think should ever be underestimated.
Um, one of the things that we do know,
as Catherine mentioned, the way he North Project was in fact
two years into that RMA process.
So we had spent two years, um, effectively looking
for expertise to help inform us about the application so
that we could see if there were things
to challenge on and things like that.
Finding that expertise in a country the size of our
and New Zealand that is independent is next to impossible.
So panels are literally at the moment effectively being
forced to either rely on the applicant's information itself,
which in Wahi North has had to happen with a range
of different things from what we can tell, um,
or they have to try
and somehow within a very truncated timeframe, scramble
to find experts
who then in an even more truncated timeframe are gonna have
to evaluate the information.
So the level of expertise you're gonna end up
with is quite likely to be compromised by that,
by those, um, timeframes.
So shortening the timeframes from our perspective
doesn't make any sense.
It's very difficult to find experts of a high caliber
who can evaluate that complexity
and level of information in a short timeframe
and who are prepared to put their name to that.
I think that's something that we really, really need
to be very, very mindful of when it comes to our laws
and how they're being discharged.
And our, um, I, I'm not sure on our times, I'm, I'm mindful
that we'd like to notes for
Comments. All met, met
time.
Um, so we do have time for just one question.
Uh, we'll go to Grant McCullum,
who's had his hand up the whole time.
Yeah. Thank, thank you. Mad chair.
Um, I'm just, Catherine, you made an interesting comment
where you said you wish, uh,
policies are based on a do no harm principle,
and I'm just wondering if
that will include doing no harm to people's jobs.
Yes. The very interesting point now,
the mining industry does harm to jobs every day
because their boom
and bust cycles in our area have led to a mining workforce
that is actually forced to move to other countries,
and then it comes back and then it moves around.
It is not a stable employer, which I know is the,
the only economic argument
that's been put up for mining is jobs.
Now I'm all for local jobs,
but I deeply wonder why, why he has such problems
with poverty, why there is such a, a desperate need
for a food bank, why there is so much poverty in
that community, which the streets there
should be lined with gold.
Because since the 1980s when I was first involved in this
project, billions has gone out
of this country into foreign capital.
Yes, you get some jobs from that, from the mines,
but when they're over, they're over.
And what you're less with is the toxic legacy
that Sue Coots talked about.
So jobs at any price grow, um, uh, uh,
is not acceptable as an argument.
We get more sustained income into our district from the
cycleways than we do from mining.
It's actually a really small part of our economy.
And because it wasn't proven in the Wahi project, um,
application, and
because there has the panel asked for our, uh,
our economists, our witnesses to give information
to the panel, we are getting a debate now about economics
that will not be happening under your proposed amendments.
So, you know, you can't just talk about jobs.
Environmental crime will create jobs,
so will crime full stop.
Does, do we advocate for that? No, we don't.
And I would add as well, just briefly, that we also need
to be mindful of the risks of having toxic waste stored
above some of our most economically beneficial environments
like the, the Del Peninsula
and the Hoki Gulf, which
as an earlier submitter identified tailing stands are
inherently known to be unstable.
It's never a question of if they'll collapse,
it's a question of when.
So even if that was in 200 years,
how many jobs are gonna be lost if the whole
of the Gulf is destroyed?
If all of everything between Yhe
and that gets that toxic waste dumped on it.
So I think we need to think longer term than
just 10 years worth of jobs. I have a 10
No Need all jobs in
This country. Thank you very much.
Yeah, look, thank you.
I'm, we, we are gonna end it there,
but, um, appreciate your submission this morning
and your insights.
So thank you very much.
Mm-hmm. Thank you.
So we will now welcome through our next submitter, uh,
the Selwyn District Council.
Oh, uh, well thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Um, I am Meia Lydia Glidden of the SEN District Council,
and with me today I have Jeff Deve,
who is our policy team lead.
Um, look, we appreciate the chance to contribute
to this important discussion, uh, on the amendment bill.
Our district has experienced rapid growth,
and while we support efficient processes,
we believe there must be a balanced, robust, uh, safeguards
and sound planning principles put in place.
And today we would like to highlight, uh, some key concerns
and some opportunities to strengthen this legislation.
I just need to, uh, note for you that we do actually have,
uh, in our district,
there have been applications put
into the fast track process.
We have yet to see those lodged with us, uh, as a council.
So I'll hand over to Jeff, uh, to talk through some
of our key points, um, and then I'll summarize at the end
and then, um, we'd like to leave.
Yeah, lots of time for q and a.
Thank you. Um, so I'll just run through, uh,
I guess four key highlights from our, um,
from the council submission.
Um, the first one, uh, relates to the changes to
section 11 and section 29 of the act, um, in relation
to consultation, um, the,
the amendment changing consultation, pre-application two,
uh, notifying, um, councils and other agencies.
So, um, I just wanna highlight I guess the, the,
the benefit to, um,
to all parties engaging in the fast tracked, um,
fast track approvals process and um,
and, uh, pre-application consultation.
Um, it provides, uh, uh, an opportunity for, um,
for councilors, for example, to, um, identify issues with,
with projects and,
and matters that need to be considered, um, ahead of, uh,
the application process
and allows, uh, applicants to, um, to respond
to those in their applications.
Um, that the reverse, uh, being that if, uh,
if consultation doesn't, um, occur that, um, you don't want
to be addressing those sorts of issues, um,
through a time constrained process.
Um, uh, so it's a benefit to panels and applicants
and, uh, the parties being consulted to, um,
to be able to identify those issues and,
and deal with them accordingly.
Um, the, regardless of that, the, the amendment, uh,
um, changing in the terminology to, to notify, it's,
it's really unclear
what the expectation is there of applicant's.
Uh, um, we'd expect that there would be, um, uh,
at some prescription around what applicants are
to provide at that point, uh, whether it's, um,
the application documents, um, in draft
or final form, um,
and a timeframe around, um, provision of that,
uh, uh, that notice ahead of, um,
applying, uh, the reason being that, um,
that would also give the, uh, council, for example,
the opportunity or the time, um, to provide comment
and, uh, then the applicant to, to respond
to those comments, um, either in their application or,
or also as part of that, uh, pre-application work.
So, um, there's a, I guess there's a lack of prescription in
what is expected in, in, um, in notifying, um, at
that point in the process.
Uh, the other point that we'd like to raise is, um,
I guess a critical issue for, for this district
and probably many other districts as well
around the country, is that the, um, a applications that,
uh, that might be able to sequence
or relying on, um, infrastructure to be, um,
provided that's, uh, that's unplanned by councils, um, at
that point in time and the pressure
that they might put on councils to, um,
bring forward infrastructure upgrades
or development, uh, to provide for those, um, at a cost to,
to the rate payers, um, uh, where there's no agreement
with developers to, to fund that otherwise.
Um, so acknowledging that the, the amendment, um,
providing, uh, new section 84 A, um,
allows panels to impose conditions on applications for, um,
uh, to ensure that infrastructure is in place.
Uh, I guess a comment on that is that, um, uh,
and imposing those conditions, uh, it's,
it's placing a requirement on the developer.
It can't compel councils to, um, to act, uh,
um, as a result of that condition.
The, the panels will still, um, already have full discretion
to impose, um, conditions of the, like, so, um, uh,
I can only see a benefit in maybe just providing a prompt
to panels that that's available to them,
um, with that new section.
Um, but again, uh, looping back to, um,
pre-application consultation
and the benefits thereof, the, um,
if there's appropriate pre-application consultation
between councilors and applicants, um, those sorts of issues
and agreements can be made ahead of time so that you're not,
um, uh, dealing with that issue
through the application process.
And certainly, um, it's not, um, beneficial if we're dealing
with that after the consents are granted.
Um, the third point relates to, um,
the limitation on the panel's discretion
to invite comment from other parties
and, um, particularly the reliance on, on council's,
local authorities to, um, I guess cover the field
with their own, um, comments on applications.
Um, two points, again,
I think pre-application consultation is beneficial, um, uh,
in this instance because it gives councils, uh,
prior knowledge of applications
and what issues are that they, um, have previously discussed
with applicants so that they can, at
that point in time in the process, advise panels
of the issues that they see that, um,
that they may comment on, um, when invited.
And then, um, the panels can make decisions about whether
the, the council's comments are, are
therefore comprehensive enough
and, um, they don't need to hear from any other parties,
um, neighbors or the like.
So, um, that's, uh, again,
um, putting a ring around pre-application consultation
as being, uh, mutually beneficial to,
to all parties engaging in the process.
Um, also, I, I think it introduces, um, uh,
some uncertainty around how the panels would go about, um,
seeking advice within a, uh, um, constrained timeframe,
seeking advice from councils, uh, about the nature
of the comments that they, they will make.
And I make the point that at that point in the process, um,
that the councils still may, um,
not be certain about whether they will comment
or the extent to which they will comment.
And, um, even providing advice to the panel about
what they will comment on that might not eventuate
and at leaves a gap for the panel.
Um, potentially, um,
not having comments on particular
aspects of the application.
So there's a, um, I guess there's a, a, a, an uncertainty
that, that that process as it's drafted creates.
Um, final point is just on the, the timeframes, um,
particularly the, the limitation
of a 60 working day timeframe to make a decision post, um,
the panel receiving comments.
Um, the submission just touches on the, the risk that, um,
that it, uh, creates a hurried decision
or a decision that, um, hasn't had the time
to fully consider the information.
Some of these projects, um, that, uh,
have either been applied for
or ones that have been listed in the legislation are, are,
are, um, large developments, hugely complex issues
that the panels are having to deal with.
Um, so I think, uh, the way that it's working at the moment
with giving panel conveners a, um, uh, discretion to
provide a longer or a shorter timeframe, um,
for making the decision, I think that's probably, um, uh,
hitting the market at the moment, um,
and providing a bit more, um, time when it's required
and, uh, less time when it's,
it's not likely to be required.
So, um, I think having a fixed timeframe is, uh,
for all applications is, is problematic.
Um, for those reasons, I think that's, uh,
that's covered off the, the main points of our submission.
There were some other points made,
but, um, happy to take questions. Um,
Yeah, no, thank you.
Look, you have almost met time, uh,
so we don't really have time for questions,
but we will just take one from Priyanka.
Um, thank you both for your submission.
Uh, just a clarification, I guess you, you mentioned
that consultation with councils at the start of the process
is useful to resolve a number of issues
and that removing that has the potential
for adverse impacts, um, that the panel will likely struggle
to resolve.
Um, could you give us an example of, um, where that,
you know, where that's happened in the past perhaps,
and where removing this requirement would be problematic?
Well, I, I think the example perhaps is, is, um,
and what I've covered previously, the, um, the, um,
infrastructure, um, development that's, that's not planned
by councils, but, um, applications are reliant on
that if we're not having a conversation about that early.
And it's, um, being discussed through comments that the,
the council make to the panel
and the panel, all
of a sudden within a constrained timeframe, having to, uh,
reconcile, um, the, the issue of,
of infrastructure not being in place for some time or,
or being unclear who's providing the cost of, of that, um,
infrastructure, um, uh, within a constrained process.
Um, you know, if, if those sorts of agreements can be, um,
or those issues can be identified
and then agreements reached ahead
of an application being lodged, um, in, in this sort
of process, then, then that's, that's an advantage
of having, um, pre-application consultation.
I mean, the, the, the legislation as it stands, it doesn't,
um, exclude pre-application, um, uh,
consultation, uh, outright or anything like that.
It, it provides for it.
But, um, uh, if it was a bit more prescriptive about what,
um, what that process involved, um, it would be beneficial
to, to all I believe.
Look, thank you very much, Lydia
and Jeff, we will have to leave it there.
Uh, we have gone over time, but we appreciate your time
and submission and insights today.
So thank you. And we will now
welcome through our next submitter,
the Greater Wellington Regional Council,
and we can see you both there.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have 10 minutes with us, so in the essence of time,
we will hand it over to you
At Mario. And
thank you chair. I'm Adrian Staples.
I'm the Deputy Chair of Greater Wellington Regional Council,
and I'm based in wider wrap and a farmer.
So I do have, um, some idea of the need to cut, cut red tape
and crack on with some projects.
Greater Wellington supports the need for having a fast
and effective pathway for consenting some significant pro
projects, but we believe
that this proposed bill will not deliver
that in its current form.
And we have three areas of concern,
which I'll speak briefly about.
You have our full submission, uh, so I don't need to, um,
and I don't need to go into that in depth,
but transferring costs to the environment
and to rate payers,
the proposed accelerated timeframes will make it extremely
difficult for local authorities to provide meaningful input.
And good decisions can only be made when decision makers
have robust assessments of environmental
and cultural effects.
And I'd just like to add
that the environment has no voice of its own.
Somebody has to speak for it, and it's the only one we have
and they're not making anymore.
We just need to look around at some very poor planning
decisions over 40, 50, a hundred years, um, to see
what can happen when we don't have information, uh,
to make robust decisions.
And we can't send out for divine infant in send out
for divine intervention.
We can't say, Hey, God, send us another environment
because we've stuffed the one that we have.
And it's this natural environment that we rely on
for our productive primary sector, our tourism industry,
and, uh, to support the growth
and development of our towns and cities.
So, as I said, it's the only one we have.
Somebody has to speak for it plus moves
to reduce our ability to recover costs means
that these costs could be transferred to rate payers.
They, uh, could be unplanned,
and that would require rate payers
to subsidize fast track development at the expense
of existing planned investment and local priorities.
And an an example of that, excuse me,
would be if the council was required to maintain or build
and maintain new flood protection
for a fast track development, then that may force us
to increase rates, uh, to cover that.
And we already have a government talking
about rates capping.
So that would mean we'd either have
to reduce flood protection elsewhere
or change our priorities that had been decided
by our local communities.
So impact on ti partnership
and obligations, the proposed amendments are con
inconsistent with our established partnership arrangements,
and they erode the ability for manino to be able
to participate meaningfully.
They undermine existing co-governance arrangements put in
place through treaty settlements
and diminish the ability of iwi
and hapu to exercise chaotic Tonga
and influence decisions that
directly affect Tonga in our region.
And the last point I would like to, uh, make is that
procedural problems resulting result in poor decision making
result and the procedural changes proposed
by the bill risk an increased poor quality of applications
with unresolved issues making their way into
the fast track system.
It's absolutely imperative that applications
that are in the system have all the information there
for decision makers to make robust decisions.
So we are likely to see approvals granted
that do not address key issues, are not implementable,
and even leading to some projects simply being declined.
And we have, uh, situations now already
where consent holders are asking to,
or seeking to amend their consents
because, um,
the decision making timeframe was kept at 50 working days.
And, uh, they're not re they, excuse me,
the consents are not really, um, I implementable
and it simply undermines the government's intent
for the fast track system that produces robust, timely,
and durable decisions that will support
regional growth and development.
So, concluding, we believe
that the current fast track legislation is working
and should be given a chance, given
that there are now numerous projects in the pipeline,
and I have with me, uh, today I have Matt, uh, Matt Hickman,
who can answer questions on policy
and Andrew Banks, uh, whose expertise is in the consenting.
Thank you Adrian, for that submission.
Look, we've got a few questions.
We'll go first to Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks, chair. Um, thanks for your submission.
You just, and I was just looking at
through on your written submission too, the,
I guess the assumption that just
because something is approved
or consented, that the burden
of it will fall on the broader rate payers.
But isn't that a bit of an assumption?
Because most of the, uh, I suppose, proposed projects
or infrastructure related by the applicants,
it's gotta be met by the applicants.
So I'm just wanting to test some
of those assumptions that you've made.
Firstly, we, we are not, we are not saying
that every project, uh,
consent conditions will fall on the rate payers to cover,
but what we are saying is
that if significant information isn't available when the
decisions are being made
and that consent conditions can be opposed, then some
of those conditions may,
it may fall on the rate payer to fund them.
For example, uh, the one that I, I spoke to
whereby if there was a new, new consent for, uh,
a development and we were required
to put flood protection in place, then
that could fall on the, the cost could fall on the,
on the rate payer rather than the developer.
But shouldn't that be picked up
through development contributions
or signaled in the application that that's a cost that needs
to fall on the applicant,
The flood protection? Well, it should
fall on the applicant,
but we want to be sure that it will fall on the applicant
and not fall on the rate payer.
Thank you. Thank you. We'll, now move to Land Farm.
Thank you so much for your submission today.
Um, my que my question is just on the sort of range
of impracticalities
and unworkability of some aspects in the bill,
but I particularly wanted to
hear greater Wellington's thoughts on this.
Um, change to section 53 where essentially the council has
to flag whether you will comment
and to what extent you will comment
in a very short timeframe
before making your actual comments.
We heard from Selwyn, um, that this could be, you know,
hugely hard to actually work through and practice.
What would greater Wellington think about this aspect?
I'll hand over to Andrew to answer that one.
Um, Koto, thank you for that question.
Um, essentially if we get a request under
that new provision from, um, the panel convener, um,
we particularly if there has been a lack
of pre-application engagement, we're unlikely
to be in a position to be able to, um, state
what we will or won't be commenting on.
And so effectively, um,
that will make the provision kind of, um, pointless
because we won't actually be at that stage yet.
Um, so yeah, that's, that's effectively
how it might work in practice or not work.
Could you be in a position then where basically you have
to just not comment and
therefore then they don't have that information
and then you are locked out of the process or, you know,
So we would effectively,
we could effectively be in a position of saying,
we haven't determined our position on this project yet,
so we can't tell you
what specific comments we will be making.
And that means that then if the intent of that provision was
that the, um, panel convener cannot invite others
to participate if the local authority is gonna comment on a
matter, they won't have that information
to make that determination.
Thank you. Uh, look, we've got time
for one last question from Selia Wade Brown.
Um, I'd like to say hello from the Rora
to Adrian particularly,
but I want to follow up with a question on, um,
her points about the intrinsic
and economic value of a healthy environment.
And I wondered if you felt that, um,
this rather dramatic change to
ministerial override really puts corporate profit well ahead
of environmental protection.
Sorry, I'm just, uh, I'm just looking for my notes here.
Um, we, we are not, certainly not comfortable
with ministerial override.
Uh, as, as I said in my speaking notes, um, somebody has
to speak for the environment.
It doesn't have a voice of its own,
and we know it's intrinsic value, uh, to, to, uh,
New Zealand a T Row.
So, uh, for us, it,
an application should go through a process
and have a decision made on it,
and then not, there shouldn't be an ability for one person
to then be able to say, well,
we think it's worth more to the country.
Um, so we are going to
Thank you Adrian, and I expect you're all feeling a bit
nervous about your voice at the moment.
Thank you Adrian
and, uh, the Greater Wellington Regional Council
for your submission today.
We appreciate your time. We have met time, so thank you
Ura. Thank you chair.
So now moving on to our next submission today, uh,
end Species, uh, foundation,
and we can see you there.
Natalie, welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have 10 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you
for your opening remarks.
Yeah. Um, thank you. Uh,
um, thank you for having me, um, on today to share, um,
what we've found over the, um, last while with regards
to the fast track bill and the changes.
Um, I have a presentation,
so shall I just shoot your screen?
So can everyone see that?
Yes, we can see it. Cool.
Um, so we are essentially opposed to, um, the, um, bill
and the changes that are being made.
Um, the main flaws that we see are
a limited 60 day assessment timeframe, which is inadequate
for, uh, proper scientific, economic and social analysis.
Um, the minimal, um, to no public participation is
of a real concern.
Um, the fact that appeal rights have been removed, um,
is also, uh, another negative.
Um, we are also really worried about ministerial, um,
potential interference
that can undermine the independence of the process.
Um, and it does appear
that there's an increased corporate influence over the, uh,
panel position.
Um, and I wanted to, uh, bring interview a case study of,
um, Tiago Green Bay and MGA Parkade.
Um, so this is one of the fast track projects.
Um, McCullum Brothers, um, want to mine this area, um, at,
at Tiao Green Bay for over, uh, for 35 years.
Um, they want to take, um, a total
of 8.5 million cubic meters of sand.
Um, the revenue for this company would be $270 million.
Um, the local community benefit is zero, um,
and the environmental cost is permanent.
Um, 'cause this is a non-renewable sand.
Um, this particular company, um,
they have portrayed a fake sand crisis.
Um, so they framed this project as being integral
to meet the needs of the Auckland Sand Market.
Um, however, um, a leading economist, Hayden Green, um,
he reviewed their documentation
and their economic, um, analysis found them to be
manifestly inadequate and demonstrably flawed.
Their transport calculations were utterly
lacking in any logic.
The emission savings, um, were entirely illusory,
and the methodology could not be repeated.
Oopsie, oopsie. Um, so yeah,
and this is what's happened
with this mining company at Mungai Parkade.
So, um, they were found
to have gouged three meter deep trenches in the sea floor.
And this was found by a local man, Damon K Shaw.
The mining activity was not monitored properly
by the Auckland Council,
and they were, were relying on
self-reporting of the company.
Um, and over the decades that they were doing this mining,
they committed multiple resource consent breaches.
And this is what we are left with today.
So, um, if you go to, you will see
that there's been extensive erosion of the coastline.
Um, and this is, um, me standing at, so, um,
the poles that are sticking out, they used
to be the pathway, um, that went, um, up with it.
You can see the green hanging down.
Um, we never used to have any black sand on this beach.
It was beautiful, squeaky white sand.
Um, so as you can see, it's, it's literally meters
above my head that we've lost.
Rocks are exposed, the whole beach is, is decimated.
Um, so this, um, company has mine, the Mungai parkade cosign
for more than 80 years.
Um, and recently this year, the, um,
Sandsbury has been confirmed to have lost over 420,000 tons
of non, non replenishing sand.
Uh, the company's taken no responsibility for this.
They don't think there's any cause
and effect with what they've done.
Um, and we know
that if there's another weather event like we had
with Cyclone Ebola, um, in the 1980s, that a second breach
of the Sandspit is gonna hit the economy on many fronts.
Um, and that's gonna be devastating, not just
for the harbor, but all the, um, all the people
that live in that community.
This is another example of the mining company.
So this is Ka, uh, where they mined, um,
Karamu Island in the Raki Gulf.
So as you can see, it's, um, been obliterated basically.
Um, they don't, they,
they say they have environmental concerns,
but, um, their track record is completely the opposite.
Rachel, did you have a question?
We'll just wait till the end for questions. Okay.
I saw your hand up. Okay.
Um, so we put together, um, an analysis of the,
um, sand supply.
And the reality is that, um, demand, what we found is
that demand exceeds supply by, uh, up to two oh
by 220% or more.
Um, so the current Auckland demand is
for 310,000 cubic meters a year.
Um, the actual alternative capacity is more than 16 million
cubic meters per year.
Um, and then below this is some
of the alternative providers.
So the Brookley Quarry that's already up and running.
There's multiple Waikato, they have plenty quarries,
Kai Sand, another Waikato company, um, is using, uh,
quarry waste to create, um, manufactured sand.
Um, and then also, um, at, has put in a, um,
application as part of the fast track to mine on land sand.
Um, and they've got much more sustainable plans in place
to turn that area into, um, uh, reserve with,
um, with lakes.
So there's, there was much more plentiful sand supply
that wasn't included in this report,
and we were really conservative without estimates.
Um, the next thing that's happened is there's, um, a group
that's rise up the Brain Bay Guardians, um,
and they've commissioned Becca,
which is New Zealand's biggest engineering consultancy
to complete an independent review
of the Auckland Sand Market.
And as we thought, um, sand resources are three
to four times the demand.
So 350% more is available than is
what is needed as well as this.
Um, there are two major sand suppliers operating in
Northland who can meet all the sand supply
requirements of Northland.
Um, not only this, there's a massive opportunity cost
of what's gonna be lost.
So, um, scallop, these are the scallop beds, um,
in Brain Bay and the mining area is com
is directly above this.
So at the moment, um, there's, um, a
or a ban on collecting scallops.
Um, and this area is rejuvenating with scallops.
Um, there's also a significant, um,
snapper fisheries in this area,
and a lot of the businesses, um,
in the area also rely on ecotourism.
So we lose, um, we fisheries, we lose local businesses
who benefits McCullen Brothers, obviously, I said
before they get $270 million.
This is a privately held company by, um, Cullum
and Jan McCullum, so it will help their family wealth.
Um, they also gave $15,000
to New Zealand first in the last election.
So I'm assuming if this project gets through,
they're gonna be supporting New Zealand first again, who,
um, who loses out basically everybody else.
There's no indication
that this would give a price reduction to Aucklands.
In fact, they're not supplying any sand
to the Auckland market at the moment
because they've stopped mining the, um, Manai sand.
Um, north Oaklanders will see environmental destruction,
coastal erosion, and higher risk with climate events.
There's no additional jobs.
Fishes will lose their livelihoods
and there'll be lost recreational fishing
and tourism operators will have their, um,
their businesses threatened as well.
So in summary, it's not wanted,
it's a hundred percent not needed.
Um, and the locals have been trying really, really hard
to have their voice heard.
Um, we've presented a petition to parliament
and people have literally been protesting on the streets
and on the beaches.
Um, so yeah, my recommendations are
that this bill gets rejected.
Um, the, the main, um, issue is that, um,
the timeframes are too short
and there's a real lack of expertise, um,
and the panels won't get the information, um, that's needed.
The liability is, um, is absolutely huge
and, um, yeah, I mean this, this whole bill is,
or the whole, um, fast track is meant to improve economics.
And this is a case study to show that
actually it doesn't improve the economics.
Um, so yeah, we need to protect what matters, so ensure
that there's really robust economic assessment,
independent expertise, democratic participate,
participation, um,
and that our clean green, uh, brand that we rely on is, um,
is upheld and the integrity of that is supported.
So yeah, that's my presentation.
Thank you very much, Natalie.
Unfortunately, uh, your presentation, we have run over time
with that, so we do not have any time for questions.
Uh, but we do thank you
for your very thorough submission today
and your presentation.
So thank you very much.
Okay, So we are now moving on
to our next submission, uh,
the Kiwis against Seabed Mining.
Kira, can you see me? Yes, Cindy, we can see you.
Welcome to the Select Committee.
Uh, we are running a little bit behind time this morning,
so we'll hand it straight over to you to open up.
Okay, Kiata, my name is Cindy Baxter.
I am the chair of Kiwi against Seabed Mining.
Um, we are a community based volunteer led organization,
which was founded 20 years after the foreshore
and Seabed legislation was passed in 2005.
Um, our support comes from across the political spectrum.
Our supporters vote for ACT and New Zealand.
First they vote for national labor
to party Maori the Greens,
but what we all have in common is the love of our ocean
of fishing, of surfing, of hanging at the beach.
We represent the communities who live on blacks
and beaches right up our West coast.
We've opposed, um, seabed Minor Trans Tasman Resources bid
to mine The Seabed, since its first application
to the EPA in 2013
and all the way through to the Supreme Court,
we've always opposed it
because of the massive destruction it would incur
and the precedent it would set.
So now we're engaged in the fast track process.
We're halfway through with the dis decision due in March,
and I'll consider our submission as read.
But I wish, I want to reiterate
that Casm poses the Fast Track Amendment bill in its
entirety for the reason stated in our submission
and urges the government to drop these amendments,
which are a fundamental threat to our democracy.
Actually, we urged the full repeal
of the Fast Track Approvals Act altogether
and the revocation of any extractive
industry consents that had given.
Um, within this process, the ministers
who dreamed up the fast track process tried
to shut out community voices by leaving
that option up to the panel.
But our panel wanted to hear from us when Chasm spoke at a
fast track panel meeting hearing in Harvard last month on on
TTS bid to dig up the bite for 20 years.
Um, we extended our thanks to the panel
for inviting us submit to submit,
which we knew it didn't have to do.
But the panel chair, who's a former high court judge told us
our invitation was,
and I quote entirely self-interest, we genuinely want
to hear from you, but these amendments would shut us out.
This is the panel that wants to do its job properly.
It wants to weigh up both the benefits
and the cost of opening up our seabed to mining.
It would be the first commercial mining operation
of its kind anywhere in the world, which if it went ahead,
it would create a precedent for the entire coastline.
And yes, the panel did invite a lot of submitters.
Part of the rationale for some
of the amendments we see here today to shut us all down.
It invited the offshore wind industry
that could bring literally tens
of thousands of jobs to the region.
It invited the fishing industry, invited Sea Lord tallies
to hook Moana,
who fought Seabed mining alongside us since 2013.
It invited recreational fishing clubs.
I mean, all up there were 52 submitters invited
by the panel, but the vast majority of the iwi
and hapu across Taranaki Shane
Jones thought there was too many.
And the amendments in this bill would further limit
their and our input.
It's unconstitutional and it breaches
and all of our rights to predict
and protect our precious land and ocean.
So Chasm has brought information to the panel
that nobody else has, such as the expertise
of the scientists who discovered we've got our own
genetically unique population of pygmy blue whales living in
and around the South Taranaki bite, the recreational fishers
who have brought information to the panel
that nobody else knows their combined expertise
of the extraordinary Seabed Feed features in
and around the proposed mining site that make it one
of New Zealand's best recreational fishing areas.
The panel wanted our expert evidence
because TTR had not done its homework
and had barely updated any of its evidence since 2016,
despite the huge advances in,
for example, modeling technology.
But it's clear the government now thinks it can only get
these massively destructive projects across the line
by shutting down civil society
and shutting down expert evidence,
issuing dodgy policy statements by ministers ahead
of a hearing because we can't have expert evidence getting
in the way of Australian mining companies like Tala,
Oceana Gold, like Santana, like Bathhurst resources, most
of the prophets will go outta the country into their
coffers to their shareholders.
I mean this, this, these amendments present an almost
impossible task for the panels.
I can't begin to imagine
how a panel could look at a project the size
of this application after two EPA applications,
three court rulings in just 60 days,
especially given the dearth of evidence from the company.
So the expert evidence has to come from elsewhere.
I think the quality, we think the qualities that
of the quality of the panels themselves would be diminished.
The EPAs are already struggling to find qualified people.
What I mean, what form high court judge would want this job?
It would be another impact that would be another impact
of these amendments, perhaps intentionally weak panels,
little to no expert evidence, a fast process
and permissive legislation all for very tiny royalties.
If a project is supposed to be of regional
or national significance, then it should be able
to stand on its own two feet.
The application should be able
to prove the applicant should be able to prove
that they're able to withstand scrutiny.
If it's so significant,
then why would you want to limit that scrutiny?
I have to say, I saw Josie Vidal from the Minerals Council
tell you yesterday that the, um,
that the mining industry is not looking for any weakening
of existing environmental safeguards.
And I'm sorry, I have to respond to that.
Um, her organization pushed hard for the fast track
and I can't see how she can stand
that statement up given its lack
of environmental safeguards.
The point of this legislation is
to shut out environmental concerns with TTR,
even a skewed EPA under pressure from the government
to get this project over the line in 2017 had
to add 109 conditions, many of them around trying
to fill in the huge gaps in environmental understanding.
Understanding this is not what democracy looks like.
This is not good stewardship
and it's certainly not gonna be good
for our international reputation.
It's our government clearly demonstrating to voters
that it's willing to be captured
and manipulated by extractive industries
despite the enormous cost.
Indeed, there was an example of
that on the radio only this morning.
This government should be ashamed of itself
and we call on you to dump these amendments
and while you're at it, repeal the existing act.
Thank you.
Thank you, Cindy.
Look, we have time for a question from Rachel Brooking.
Tha thanks Cindy for that and for all your involvement
and experience with this.
And I just wanted you to comment on two things.
One is, um, is this application the same
as what's been declined before?
That's one question. And the second question is, uh,
you've explained to us that the different groups
that have given comment have
provided a whole lot of evidence
that will have been very helpful
for a robust decision making.
And you made a comment that that number of groups, uh,
was one of the reasons why Shane Jones
might be wanting to change things.
So do you think just to, um, pull, pull, talk about
that a wee bit more, do you think, uh, this application
is the reason, one of the reasons for, um, these amendments?
Yes, certainly from these statements
that Shane Jones has made about the number of submitters
and um, and, and, and sort of expressing concern that, um,
all of us would have the right to appeal.
Um, and now he's shut that off.
I mean he certainly made those very strong comments in the
media, um, several times
and even as far as, um, we understand he is even met
with the panel conveners to discuss it with Chris Bishop.
Um, so that is absolutely a reason
and to come back to the TTR application.
Yes, I mean this is the,
the panel convener commented at the beginning of this.
She said, I've looked through these documents
and I really can't find anything that's more up
to date than 20 15 20 16 when they la when they applied
to the EPA the second time round, um, we considered,
the only reason they got across that was
because the EPA set up a,
a full member panel gave the pro business chair a casting
vote and then put in 109 conditions, which
actually got thrown up by the high court because, um,
because they, they weren't legal
and didn't fit with the legislation.
So, so yeah, I I do think this is entirely political.
I think, you know, the fast track these
panels are really doing their best.
I mean, they're doing, they're,
they're doing their best to get across the line.
It's a massive, it's a massive project
and there's gonna be others coming along like the dentist
and plateau like the Bendigo Mine, which you cannot look at
and get all the right sort of expertise,
especially if you shut up the groups
that have the expertise in 60 days.
You know, it's just shoving this through.
But I mean, the worst thing is that they,
that these companies, you know,
we we're not gonna see the profits come here,
the royalties New Zealand charges absolutely minute
and certainly with the TT R application, um, most of that,
um, most of the value will go overseas in most of these.
And it will go to, its, it's a hundred percent Australian
owned, you know, the way the tax laws are set up,
we're not gonna see much money coming into this country.
Look, thank you very much, Cindy.
Uh, we will have to leave it there.
We have other submissions waiting to come through.
Thank you for your submission today,
your insights, um, and analysis.
Appreciate it. Thank you. Thank
You.
And so we will now move on to Winton Land Limited
and we can see Bronwyn
and Simon, welcome to the select committee today.
Uh, we'll hand it over to you.
You have 10 minutes with us,
but take your submission as read.
Thank you. And I was sorry,
is our audio working all right?
It appears to be working, yes.
Okay, great. Sorry, it just stalled at our end.
I was just going to highlight some of the key points,
but then mainly leave our 10 minute slot
for questions if that was useful.
So just to recap, uh, that we are coming today as, uh,
an applicant of a listed, uh, project where
the w has already fully utilized the 50 working day
suspension period provided in the act, uh, partly
to align the project with another listed project being NZ
TA's project, and also in an attempt
to address the infrastructure constraints
that have been raised by Auckland Council and its comments.
So the, the submission notes, uh,
and understanding that these amendments are intended
to apply to existing applications that are
through the process at the moment.
I saw some commenters yesterday, uh,
suggesting that that wasn't the case.
So if there is any doubt around it, uh, Winton requests
that the amendments through this, they'll apply to projects
that are currently going through the process.
The, the key issue is raised in the submission is the
concern that is arising in a number of these projects
where they have been listed despite being out of sequence
to use a, a phrase commonly used rather than struggling in
the process, um, being told that they're out of sequence and
therefore there's no infrastructure and they can't proceed.
So there's been a very clear decision
to list them despite being out of sequence.
And then that is being used as a key constraint
to progressing through the system.
And so that's where the, the main impetus
for the submission on the bill is focused.
Uh, we've put forward three, uh, additional amendments
for hopefully consideration through this process.
Uh, the first relates to the, the
clause 46 in the bill, which is intending
to allow conditions to be set
for the infrastructure provision.
I expect that that has been raised as a concern in a number
of submissions to you.
In b of our submission,
we've put forward an alternative approach which may get
around the concerns that have been raised,
but also possibly achieves the outcome,
uh, that was intended.
And so that's just not to use the adequacy of infrastructure
as an adverse impact under the bill
that would enable a project to be declined.
The second one is a problem that I understand a lot
of applicants are facing in terms
of the timeframe set from the outset by the panel convener
for the decision not being able to adjusted in due course.
We've suggested a, a subtle way of changing that so
that an applicant can push the timeframe out if needed.
And then the third one is that if a project does use all
of its suspended time and has to, um, well as withdrawn
or kicked out, that if it comes back,
and again, it starts at the point
that it was at at the time rather than starting back at the
beginning again for no reason.
So those are the additional amendments that we put forward.
But, um, keen to leave the time for questions. Thank you.
Thank you very much for that submission.
Uh, we'll go first to Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks, chair. Um, thanks for your submission.
I just wanna, uh, talk a bit further about the out
of sequence piece.
'cause obviously that's been, it's been a key issue
of contention and I don't wanna say
councils are weaponizing it.
'cause I think that might be a little bit harsh,
but what's your view,
I still can't cl clarify exactly what you're wanting.
Are you suggesting that the applicant will, as long
as they're prepared to meet all of the infrastructure costs,
um, or are you saying that the councils will,
will also be sort of co-sharing those costs?
'cause obviously their pushback is they're at capacity in
terms of rates, borrowings
and those sorts of, so I just wanna see
where you reconcile this sticky point.
Uh, so I guess stepping back from the,
the funding perspective, uh, through the process, uh,
we've been told, uh, and I don't wanna misquote anyone,
but basically that it will take 18 months
to work out whether there is capacity or not
and what is needed if there isn't.
Um, and so that's not necessarily just a funding issue,
it's a, a hard constraint, um, coming at us saying
that they simply don't know and don't think there is,
but will take 18 months
or so to work out if there is infrastructure or not.
Okay. So it's not about funding,
but it's just councils aren't really aware
of their own internal capacity constraints or, and,
and this isn't just an Auckland issue,
this is right across the country.
So you're saying is you, your, your desire
with your application, your submission is just saying
it can't be used, therefore, is it a bit of a plug
and play in hope and see?
Well, I guess there's two, um, parts to it.
One is at a resource consenting stage, uh,
allowing the development from the
environmental approvals perspective.
You then obviously need the, the infrastructure in place
to get the connection in due course.
And that's a separate decision by the network utilities as
to whether that's available in,
in my experience the adequacy of the connection has, um,
has been brought into the resource consent decision making
when technically it's not.
Uh, well, there is a strong argument
that it shouldn't be a factor at the time
of the resource consent decisions.
Okay. So you're saying they're using it as a hurdle
Prematurely in the conversation?
Yes. Okay, thank you.
So just a quick supplementary on that, um,
because you talk about the infrastructure,
can you give an example of some of the projects
where you are finding this?
Is it just in relation to NZTA roading
or are we looking at other projects as well?
No, it's, um, in the example of Sun Field,
it's really the water and, uh, wastewater.
Yeah. Um, so it's just the basics of having a conversation
with the, the infrastructure provider
and trying to understand what existing capacity is already
in place, um, what upgrades would be needed
for any additional infrastructure for the project,
and if those upgrades have been planned and funded.
Um, all we're really looking for,
is it from a developer's perspective, is
to understand the certainty
around the provision of infrastructure.
Um, so that if it isn't available for the project,
we can obviously put plans in place, which may, you know,
I mean, Winton funding the, the upgrades so that, uh,
services can be provided to the project,
But it's specifically in relation to that project.
Yes. Thank you. Um, we'll now move to Rachel Brooking.
Yeah. Hi, Bronwyn.
Do you think this issue of being listed,
but outta sequence could be fixed if in fact the Fast Track
Act gave greater weight to council plans
and didn't use a listing process, uh,
that didn't have any public process?
Okay. So if you, just so I'm clear,
if you remove the schedule that lists projects
and requires an assessment against
future development strategies and the like
before allowing a project to go through.
Yes. Uh, well
that would, that would resolve the out
of sequence issue.
Um, yep.
Thank you. Brilliant.
Thank you very much, uh, for your submission today.
It appears that we have no further questions,
but, uh, certainly some really interesting points
that you have raised in your submission for us
to consider. So thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, rich.
So we will now move on to our next submitter today, uh,
trans Power New Zealand Limited,
and we can see you both there.
Welcome to the select committee this morning
in the essence of time.
Thank you. We'll hand it straight over to you.
You've got 10 minutes with us,
but, uh, of course, take your submission as read.
Thank you. Thank you for the opportunity
to appear before the select committee.
I'm Joe Moore, senior Corporate Council,
and with me is Roy Noble, our HVDC project director.
Um, you'll be aware that trans, the owner
and operator of the grid.
Um, we have a large pipeline of projects
and intend to make use of the Fast Track Approvals Act.
And we have two projects that are listed,
including our HVDC project.
Um, we've lodged a brief submission
that covers three points.
Um, firstly, the, we support the ability to amend a listing
for a project, but we seek that the ability is broadened,
um, to, so
that the project can include associated activities so long
as the deliverable remains the same.
So many, um, ancillary activities only become known when
projects advance through their investigation phases
or contracts are awarded.
And innovations and efficiencies can
occur as projects advance.
And we concern that section 1 1 7 limits the ability
to amend a listing to situations where the scope
of the listed project will not be substantially different,
taken into account matters of location,
scale, and the nature of works.
And Mr. Noble can talk about his experience in relation
to potentially ancillary activities for our HVDC project
that may be beyond the scope of the current current wording
of, of 1 1 7.
So, so as an example, um,
the HVDC project is a, um, program of, um,
projects over seven or eight years.
It was listed in mid, um, 24, um, through the
investigation and, um, um, design stage issues arise
that weren't originally I identified.
And example of this is Ong Bay, which is close
to Wellington, where the design of the replacement, um,
termination, um, stations
requires the, um, building of Earth platforms
and requires approximately, um, or,
or requires the material to actually build them,
query quarrying of the material using a
localized quarry on the, uh, on the, um, on the,
um, farm as a far more e
efficient and less impactful, um, um, process, um,
then transporting through, uh, um, query.
Um, however, querying isn't specified in our,
our original listing.
Um, and as such, we are actually concerned
that we would have to apply under a,
under a standard consenting process or,
or have to apply to the minister for this, uh, um, um,
um, type of ag activity.
So it is a concern that the accuracy of scoping
during the listing is very, very, um, tight.
Yeah, thank you. The, the second point we, we make relates
to staging, and again, we support the ability
to stage a project, um,
but the bill seems to envisage linear projects rather than
projects in one location.
And for trans power, we, we may want to separate out, uh,
say bulk earthworks from, from the above ground,
um, electrical infrastructure.
Um, but the bill seems to only envisage, uh, staging
where the works are in and of themselves nationally
or regionally significant.
And we are concerned that that is a constraint
and enabling earthworks
and activities of that nature wouldn't meet that threshold
of being nationally and regionally significant in
and of themselves, uh, despite the fact
that they would be a core component
of the eventual nationally significant
infrastructure or project.
Um, but I'll, I'll pass on to Mr. Noble
who can talk about staging in relation
to H-V-D-C-A bit more.
So also, also just once again, just, um, that the, um,
project program is over seven
or eight years with, with, with, with enabling works
during 27 28, um, replacement the,
of the cable termination stations 28 to, um, um, 2030
cable replacement, 20 32, 20 31,
and, and pulling the old cables out 2032
to 33, we could get underway
with the enabling works as a stage
and actually start works, which is the purpose of
the act was to speed up projects, um,
and also, uh, um, de-risk them.
Um, so being able to stage them is appropriate.
However, if we can't stage them those future
projects in the 2030s
or 2028, we, we actually struggle to get
contractors to be able to describe how the works will occur
as, as the full blown, um, um, design that hasn't been,
um, um, completed.
So being able to stage 'em gives you the ability to kind
of plan out and be a lot more structured and
and efficient.
Thank you. So the final point we, we make is in relation
to the, uh, clause 84 a in relation to the imposition
of conditions in relation to infrastructure.
And I'm sure you've heard, um,
from quite a few parties about that.
Our concern is that the way it's drafted currently,
it would enable panels to impose conditions in relation
to our infrastructure when we are not the applicant
and requiring certain things to happen with them.
So we've suggested some tweaks, um, to the wording so that
that clause relates to the applicant's infrastructure,
not a third party's infrastructure,
and we are happy to take questions.
Look, thank you, uh, very much for that submission.
It was really interesting to hear you give, uh,
a tangible example, uh, around the accuracy of the scoping
and using the quarrying as an example, just for us to,
you know, actually understand practically, you know, the,
the impact.
What kind of cost is involved with that in terms of,
you know, obviously a lot of these projects are massive
and they require a lot of investment.
Um, and then obviously to not be able
to have any flexibility in that, that slight change there
that could have quite an impact.
Um, could you maybe just quantify
that from an economic point of view?
I, I can, um, quantify that we have, um, sub admitted
to the, um, commerce Commission with our, our MCP, which,
um, for the cables
and the building replacements,
the value was about 1.1 billion.
Um, there's also a required completion date
by 2031.
We have a, um, um, con a contract in place
that requires the cables to be replaced in 2031.
And if we can't complete that, we will be in, um,
d in default of con contract.
Um, the current waiting time
for cables is approximately seven years.
You have to actually book ahead. So very important.
Yeah. Wow. No, that really puts it in context for sure.
Um, look, we'll go to Grant McCollum now for a question.
Yeah, thanks. Um, yeah, I'm just, I'm sure your,
the last point you're making around the, um, the linkage
between projects and obligations on yourselves, uh,
so effectively, I suppose really, I suppose the focus needs
to be from people who are applicants for projects
to make sure they are working with you before they apply.
Would that obviously be the logical thing
That, that that would certainly be our preference.
Uh, but there are a number of projects, um,
that have been listed that will require us
to move our assets or require us to connect.
And some of them we haven't had contact with.
And I guess this, so there, there is,
I guess we are concerned about the wording in relation to
that specific condition.
We are also concerned about those projects in relation
to our activities being ancillary.
So we will need to move for them to progress so
that they're sort of intertwined.
So I think yeah, key things that need to be sort
of joined up for that, for the act to work so
that all infrastructure has progressed
and ours doesn't become the barrier to others.
Yeah, and I'm just, and
and the sub on that is we, we are, for example,
like I know in the north here,
people are proposing all sorts of solar developments.
I'm sure you guys are well aware of it.
Um, and I think that's great,
but they've gotta get the power out
of the out Northland somehow.
And that's the,
and that obviously you, that's gotta be a discussion
that's worked with you beforehand.
Otherwise it would just,
people would be wasting their money.
Is there a way, and
because ultimately we're going to need more power, so of you
are, you work clearly, you must be w working about
how you can help deliver the trans trans, um,
transmit the power around the
country in Norton's an example.
Are you working in that space?
Yeah, I can answer that.
We, we are doing quite a lot of work.
We have a customer team that works directly
with the solar developers, um, so
that we know what's in the pipeline
and we've got information about how they can connect to us.
And then we've got a separate division
that is working in relation to, to
what the grid will look like in the future.
So we've recently had a public consultation on
that called. Yeah.
Thank you madam. Quite
A lot of work being done.
Yeah. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much for your submission,
really insightful and uh, you know,
some really interesting
examples there to put it into context.
So thank you. Uh, we must move on,
but appreciate your time today. Thank
You. Thank you very much.
So we now move on to our next submitter, uh,
horizons Regional Council.
And we should see them popping through soon.
Uh, Nikki Riley?
Yes. There we are. There we go.
We can see you, we can see you all.
Welcome to the select committee today.
Uh, we'll hand it over to you.
Uh, you have 10 minutes with us, so thank you.
Thank you Catherine. And good morning.
Um, just a little bit through the horizons.
We are the regional authority for the Mani Nui region.
We're responsible for the region's natural resources,
flood control, facilitating economic growth,
transport planning, and more.
The overarching comments from us on the bill.
We believe there are potential unintended consequences from
the bill in its current form that require amendment
to ensure the legislation works as intended
and that the regional and national benefits from the
government, the government six, are fully realized.
There's a balance to be found between enabling activities
and ensuring well-rounded consideration is given
to the effects of those activities.
We consider some of the amendments, uh,
do not strike the right balance.
Uh, we note that the process for developing
and enacting this bill is inconsistent
with the government's principles
of responsible regulation under the
Regulatory Standards Act.
And particular, there's not been sufficient time
to consult on these changes, um, particularly
around the fact that we've got a new council.
We've, um, just been through the election period.
Um, we've just got a new chair, that would be me.
Um, we've got two and a half days, uh, working for council
to actually get the work done, uh, in the five days
that you gave us for the submission
because we had, uh, council meetings
and things like that to attend to.
So for us, this meant that was really a challenge
and insufficient time for officers
to prepare a comprehensive submission
with meaningful examples to include in the submission.
It was fortunate that there was already a council meeting
scheduled that we could actually approve a
submission at all.
And we note that other councils may have not been in a
position to submit Catherine, uh, clause six,
amending the consultation requirements amended sexual ever.
And in relation to clause six, in terms of changing consult
to notifying writing, in our experience, early engagement
with applicants about matters relating
to their application results in a better
product down the line consultation allows feedback on
components such as the assessment
of the environmental effects
and other feedback horizons can give from a technical
and a planning perspective.
We found that some fast track applications
that we've been involved with, the applicants end up having
to come back to us for variations to the consent
or consenting, which then lengthens the process overall,
overall due to issues with the decision issued
by the expert panel.
Early engagement also minimizes the risk
of the information gaps.
One example of this was the PI here to a wind farm decision.
We engaged with the applicant's consultants prior
to their referral application
and prior to the lodgement of their substantive application,
while the applicant received further information requests
during the fast track process relating
to the territorial authority matters.
No further information requests were made
of the applicant in relation to regional matters.
So that was a direct example
and an indirect example is, while it was useful
later in the process, then this clause applies
to another example
of the productive con consultation in our region is the
Rafta Wheatland project.
For this project, we were both the applicant
and the regulatory authority.
We received the draft condition from the panel which
were not enforceable.
There were concerns from for Horizons about how
to achieve the conditions as the applicant,
but also how they could be enforced as the regulator.
Um, because as the regulator, we could provide
feedback on the enforceability of the conditions.
This made it easier for us as the applicant too.
We typically find that those applications
or applicants that engage with us in a meaningful manner
with horizons prior to the lodgement
of the referral application
or the substantive application,
have better outcomes in terms of obtaining a quality consent
that does not require variations
or changes in the conditions after the consent is issued.
And I believe that's
what the prior people were commenting on before us.
Um, finally, clauses 17 and clause 32 comments
and you advise section, uh, the new section 32 A and 52 A.
So all the applications under the previous Fast Track
legislation, MBA
or COVID had a tight timeframe for councils to comment.
Five working days to comment on application
and five for the draft commission, uh, com conditions.
This was also incredibly tight, given the size
of the applications
and often meant that we were triaging the effects
and providing comments on the most important points
rather than trying
to review the application in its entirety.
The current legislation extended it to 20 working days,
but the bill proposes to reduces to 10.
So this would mean that we were tuning back to scrambling
to review the application for our team.
For example, the Taranaki Einsteins Mining Project
had a massive application,
and while we utilized the same consultants for the review
of the technical components
that the Taranaki Regional Council had used, there was some
and we're quite familiar with the documents.
Um, if that had not been the case review of
that large quantity of information
and documentation in a shorter timeframe would've been
incredibly challenging.
So we'd like to reinforce that, um, working with, um,
the application or the applicant before would assist us.
Any questions?
Yes, we do. We do have some questions.
Have you finished your, uh, presentation there? Thank
You. Thank you, Catherine.
Okay, brilliant. Thank you.
Look, we'll go to Lan farm for the first question.
Thank you, Tina.
Coso, thank you so much for your submission.
We've heard a lot from councils about the impractical
nature of a lot of these amendments and the unworkability,
and you just used the term, um, you will be back
to scrambling to be able to even
meet timeframes, let alone, uh, the, the quality
of the actual information that you might be in a position
to provide in those timeframes.
Do you think, um, these amendments are taking something
that was just workable, um,
disregarding anything about the merits of it to something
that's essentially entirely unworkable?
Or are you just trying to signal that there will be
concerns and, um, scrambling,
but that ultimately you'd be able to meet the timeframes?
How should the committee interpret what you're saying?
Oh, that's Perus really land
and it's all things being equal.
But I think, um, from, I'll get the change actually who
answer this, but I think that the scrambling is, is meant
to evoke, um, a response.
And the key for us is, um, as I mentioned earlier, working
with the applicant before the application
because it's that when you get those large files coming
to you, chunking
that technical information down is quite a challenge.
As, as I'm sure you all understand as mps.
So, but, uh, some of these timeframes are,
are quite tight, aren't they?
Mm. Vianna yes.
And I think, uh, I mean it comes down partly to resourcing
and if the team, the team would potentially prioritize this,
it would be at the consequence of something else, um,
being able to be processed within timeframes
or, um, or something like that.
So I think that, uh,
but we have a certain amount of resource, uh,
we might be able to contract out sometimes.
Um, but that then again, costs extra money.
Um, and so it becomes a question of prioritizing and,
and what falls off the back as a result of trying to respond
to something within these sorts of timeframes.
'cause ultimately that's what'll have to happen
in order to prioritize.
So, so essentially I'm hearing you saying basically it'd
be at the mercy of your core functions
and your actual responsibilities suffering
because you need to jump
to these fast track projects, essentially.
Not that for some degree, yes.
Uh, or we'd have to try and fund
or find extra resource to manage that.
Um, obviously as you know, consenting can be quite reactive.
You don't always know what's coming in the door.
You don't know how many consent you're processing at any one
time, sometimes are busier than others.
And so I think that, um, yeah, it, it's a function
that we take seriously
and, um, it is something that we would have
to then have a conversation as a team as to
what the appropriate level of, um, effort to put in.
And it might be the other part to it is
that we may not be able to put the same level of scrutiny
into reviewing the drafted conditions
and things, um, on the, the fast track as we would like
to ensure that the outcome is enforceable and practical.
Look, thank you very much
for your submission today, for your insights.
Uh, we appreciate it. So thank you.
Thank you. Have a good day.
Same to you. Uh, now we will call
through our next submitter, uh, the Port Company CEO group.
And we saw Charles just there.
We can see you, Charles, welcome
to the select committee this morning.
Well, thank, thank you very much
and thank you for having me.
And thank you to the, uh, the team supporting you, um, uh,
uh, for being able to s slot us in.
It's been much appreciated.
So you've got, um, our submission.
Yes, we, it's on behalf of the 13, um, uh,
import export ports, um, in New Zealand.
And I think three of the, uh, ports have actually been,
uh, involved in the, um, uh, the new fast track regime.
We've had, um, successful outcomes for Port of Auckland
and North Port, and we have the famous Tara Ranga case, um,
uh, still, still, uh, going, going through.
Uh, so our, our submission is very much colored by, um,
by those experiences.
So most importantly, uh, we are very pleased to see
that the, uh, bill, uh, corrects the issue, um,
in the pro project description for the Port of Toga project.
And also we support the Bill's creation
of a far less onerous process for making minor amendments
to the project description of listed projects.
Very welcome. Uh, much appreciated.
Um, and then we've made a, a series of of other, uh,
comments, uh, which you, you will have read
and made some, some proposed, um, um,
amendments to the bill.
Um, but perhaps could I just focus on one other issue, uh,
and that is the issue of, uh, transition.
Um, it seems to be unclear as to, um, uh,
how, um, uh, the,
uh, amendments are gonna apply to projects that are already,
um, uh, going, going through the process.
I noticed, um,
or heard a number of the previous submitters
also raised this point.
There are no transitional provisions.
So we, we suggest that there, there should be transitional,
uh, provisions.
So maybe, um, rather than, uh, just repeat
what we have in writing in front of you, which you've read,
I'm happy to take any questions.
Thank you.
Thank you, Charles. Look, we'll start with Debra Russell.
Um, thank you Charles. Uh, in your paragraph six B,
you talk about the increased risk
of collateral, um, litigation.
If, um, and later on I see you explain it as, um,
if there are parties who, uh, ought to be able
to comment on a project but aren't invited to do so.
Can you elaborate on that a little?
Can you, the sorts of situations you could
envisage happening there?
Uh, well, we we're obviously wanting to encourage, um, a,
a process that is, uh, as efficient
and streamline streamlined and quick as as possible.
Um, but we do, uh, want to make sure that all parties
that have a legitimate interest, um, um,
uh, are consulted.
Uh, and if there is an omission, um, we, we would fear
that we would be going into an elongated, um, uh, sort
of an appeals process or court court challenge process,
something that, that at least one
of the projects has experienced, um, a number
of times already.
So it's really just to, um, ensure that, that, um,
those parties that should be consulted are consulted.
You used an interesting word there, um, uh,
legitimate interest.
So, um, this is what I'm trying to puzzle through is,
you know, the situations in which you could get
collateral litigation.
Couple with that, with legitimate, um, interest.
What, again, what do you see as, I suppose,
legitimate versus illegitimate?
What could give rise to collateral, um, litigation,
but what wouldn't, what's the, there's,
there's a gray area there.
I think there, there's a whole lot of possibilities,
essentially, um, um, mistakes, emissions can occur,
uh, and we have to get it right early on,
and the process will then run efficiently.
Legitimate interest. Could you expand on what you see
as a legitimate interest in not,
'cause it implies there are illegitimate
interest to projects as well.
Well, no, I'm not saying there are illegitimate interests.
Maybe it was the wrong term. Sure.
But, but there will be some people who have got only the,
um, uh, most tenuous
or, um, uh, no, no interest to,
for principal might be, um, uh, seeking to have, um,
uh, input and claim they should have been consulted.
Um, uh, we are talking about those,
those people that obviously should be consulted and,
and, um, who, um, might legitimately, I'm using
that term correctly, um, um, be be deemed to have,
should have been consulted by a court process if,
if they go to court to challenge.
I guess there's a, a, We'll move on.
We've got quite a few questions I just wanna
Ask. It's quite important. There's
quite an interesting space
between legitimate interest and vexatious.
Um, people are being vexatious. There's somewhere
In between we get those as well. Yeah,
It's very tricky. Okay, thank you.
Tha thank you, uh, for those points. Uh, grant McCullum.
Yeah, thank you. Um, yep.
Just, um, um, given
that the ports have actually had a couple of examples here,
the Auckland port expansion, which was approved in a fairly,
um, streamlined manner, if it hadn't been
for the Fast Track Act, how long do you anticipate
that whole process might've taken?
And what would it could have been the implications of,
of going through a, um, a, a normal process?
Uh, well, I hate to have this thought, but,
but yeah, we've got the precedent of the toga application,
uh, sitting there, and you'll be well aware.
I think they're, they've either submitted
or will be submitting separately,
so they can tell you in gory detail
what they've been going through.
But, but we, we are talking many, many years.
Um, and at present, um, uh,
unless we get, uh, get this bill passed, uh, no, no, no idea
as to how much longer it's gonna take in terms
of res resolution.
And it's not just the time, it's the cost.
It's an enormous cost.
Um, so, uh, this is why we, we are so supportive
of this legislation and so pleased that the Auckland, um,
uh, process was so relatively straightforward.
Even there, though we did have the initial problem, uh,
where the information on penguins was deemed
to be insufficient and, and, um, it was sent back
and that led to a slight delay,
but we got that resolved very fast.
So, but I'm just, in terms of the economic implications
of, of these sorts of projects, given the crucial nature
of the infrastructure ports, what could have been the,
you know, the, the, what, what was the potential
for flow on challenges for New Zealand's, um, e export
imports and exports?
Well, en enormous, and this is the issue with Targa,
it is our largest export port.
Mm-hmm. Um, it's at pretty much full capacity.
Um, uh, we had one, I think the biggest, uh,
container line in the world wanted to start,
start up a new service using toga, was told, sorry,
we're at full capacity, we can't take you.
Um, and it's gone somewhere else.
Uh, that's good for the somewhere else, but,
but, um, in terms of the efficiency
of the New Zealand economy, it wasn't the, the, uh,
the optimal outcome.
So, uh, unless, uh, we do get, um, uh,
this project, uh, consented
and built, uh, there is going
to be a long term productivity impact on the New Zealand
economy, and it's not gonna be a positive impact.
Thank You. Thank you.
Look, we've got time for one last question,
and I will go to Celia Wade Brown.
Hello, Claire Charles, good to see you here.
Um, couple of questions following on from your submission.
Um, the panel appointments
to get a good group, the panel conveners seem
to have been working quite hard.
Your concern about the timeframe for appointment is that
given there are limited number
of experts in different fields in this country,
we may not get the best appointments.
Would that be fair? Uh,
If we, if we, um, uh, rush the process, that is the risk?
Yes.
And secondly, um, I just wondered,
given that the Port, um, presumably
makes a profit on the
volume rather than the value of exports, um,
do you think that the Port group, um,
which does valuable work, um,
may be focused particularly on bulk commodity
exports rather than adding value, which might be better
for the country as a whole?
I think, you know, the, uh, Auckland is another really
good example here.
Um, so yes, there's a lot of, um, uh,
dairy powder that goes out of toga,
but Port Auckland, uh, is importing
and exporting extremely high value, as is toga.
Um, uh, the, the what goes across those two wolves, um,
is, um, uh, reflective
of New Zealand's overall export performance, both commodity,
non-commodity, obviously.
Um, we are, um, moving to a,
um, you know, a, a world where perhaps we can't, uh,
produce more, more, um, of some of these commodities.
And the focus will be on increasing, uh, value.
They're still gonna be, um, traveling through our ports.
You know, right now, 99% of our exports
by white are going through our ports.
Uh, they're crucially important to the economy.
And we saw this during COVID when we,
when we had international delays, ship ship's not coming,
uh, we started running out of goods and,
and our exporters couldn't,
couldn't send goods overseas and, and we suffered.
So it's, it's critical we get this right,
and it's absolutely critical we get this particular, um,
project, uh, consented for toga.
No, thanks so much, Charles.
Uh, we'll have to leave it there.
We appreciate all those insights, uh,
you know, really important.
So thank you. Thank
You for your time. Thank you.
So, we'll now move to our next submitter,
federated Mountain Clubs
of New Zealand, and
We, We can see you there, Megan, welcome
to the select committee.
You've got 10 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you.
Thank you. Can you hear me okay?
Yes, we can hear you very well. Thank you.
Excellent. So, um, I'll just give a really, um,
quick summary of our really key points, uh, from our,
from our submission, um, and, and also, um, a quick example.
Um, but I would like to, to leave a good amount of time
for people to ask questions.
Um, so I guess probably our, our primary concern is, um,
that the bill is going to reduce the quality of information
that's available to, um, panels.
Um, so they won't have the right information to be able
to make decisions based on fair, adequate,
and accurate information.
And I, I think that that could actually have the, um,
the effect of, of actually increasing the risk
of litigation in the process.
Um, because obviously, um, you can't legislate your way out
of requiring fair, adequate and accurate information.
There's a lot of case law around that that supports that.
Um, the bills also
or appears to have been drafted with the express intent of
reducing, um, public participation
and the Fast Track approvals Act.
Um, and,
and to us that further erodes the democratic process
and undermines, um,
public faith in the Fast Track approvals Act
and the process that that sits, that sits around that.
Um, the, the other thing with regards to that is that,
you know, we need to, to keep in mind
that this legislation is, is under a year old.
Um, it's very unusual to have this volume of changes, um,
in a piece of legislation that's, that's so new.
And it does beg the question, um, which we did, uh,
broach in our, in our initial, uh, in our initial submission
to the Fast Track Approvals Act.
Um, that, that perhaps the whole act, um,
and the amendments have actually been rushed
and not well thought through.
Um, and that the, um,
and that the, uh, that the, uh, implications
of, of some of the, the causes in the act haven't,
haven't really been thought through, um, when the act was,
was initially drafted.
Um, there's also those, those secondary concerns around, um,
you know, the bill undermining environmental protections,
the bill inappropriately, um, consolidating, uh,
power in the hands of, of a single minister
or a couple of ministers.
Um, the bill also gives an, an inappropriate level
of influence to, to the applicant as well.
Um, so we're all, you know, we're, we're an an environmental
and recreational advocacy group.
And, um, at the moment, um, we've been, um, advocating
with regards to the, uh, waha, um,
hydro project, um, project.
They've, they've submitted their substantive application,
um, but in their application, they've,
they've actually claimed to have consulted with FMC.
And whilst they did connect with us beforehand, we
provided a significant amount
of feedback on factual inaccuracies in their application,
um, um, which were, which were not taken into account.
And in fact, they actually came back to us in an email
to say that they wouldn't have time
to take them into account
before they put their application through.
Um, now in the situation where that happens in a normal
situation, you would have the opportunity to then go ahead
and comment on the, um,
on the application in a public submission process.
The Fast Track Approvals Act doesn't allow that.
We have to be invited to comment,
but at the moment we can be invited to comment
the amendments would mean that, that the,
the panel can't seek further information from us, um,
as experts in recreation
and back country recreation, um,
especially in a situation like this
where it appears like there may be an inappropriate
relationship between the independent consultant
and the applicant, um, the panel should have the ability to,
to engage with, with other, uh, with, with other
groups and, and experts that would be able to, um,
that would be able to,
to fill in those gaps in, in knowledge for them.
And without that, they can't have a robust, um,
they can't make a robust decision.
Um, so the, we also note the ability of the applicant
to comment on the panel composition
and their ability to alter their submission
after submitting it.
And those two things are inevitably actually going to lead
to increased timeframes, um, within the process.
So I'm, I'm not convinced that the, um, that the intent
of this is to purely improve the timeframes, um, appear.
It appears that there's been a cherry picking of, um,
of different causes that will favor the developers
as opposed to just improving the timeframes.
Um, so I'll take the rest of our submission as read
and happy to, to take questions.
Brilliant. Thank you very much, Megan, for
that submission.
Uh, look, we'll go to Priyanka first for a question.
Um, thank you for your very strong
and very clear, uh, submission, both written and verbal.
Um, you've, you've made, um,
your points very clear in terms of what you think this, um,
legislation will do, um, reduce public participation,
increase the control of, you know,
ministers in the decision making process, um, the fact
that it undermines environmental outcomes
and so on, which are very, um,
very strong statements to make.
Um, some of us would agree with you,
but what is your response to
what ministers have said in the first reading, for example,
of this, um, piece of legislation that it just aims
to increase grocery, uh, competition,
supermarket competition, and make some very technical
and minor changes to the Fast Track Act.
What would your, what's your view on that?
I would say that that's, um,
completely gaslighting the public.
Um, there was, I think in the, uh, in the amendments bill,
there was only one or two mentions of the, um,
of the groceries, um, of, of the increase in competition
for, for supermarkets.
The rest of the changes have significant knock-on effects,
um, for any public land.
And that's why we are concerned about them.
If it was simply with regards to, um, the grocery sector,
um, we wouldn't really have much to say about it.
Thank you. Thank you. Uh, land Farm has a question.
Ua, thank you so much for your submission
and especially the example that you gave
of the White Aha Hydro project
and your experience with that, which is really concerning.
Is your understanding that if these amendments went through
and that same thing happened
where basically you were claimed to be consulted with, um,
and, and that you raised a number of issues
that weren't addressed in the substantive application,
is it your understanding that basically as long
as the council and any, um,
statutory iwi
and hapu groups that had a right to be consulted with,
as long as they had their voices heard,
there would actually be no avenue
for you at all? Is that the case?
That's correct. And even right now, um,
we've written letters to, um, to Doc, so
that doc can raise our concerns on our behalf.
We've written letters to the panel convener,
we've written letters to the panel.
We still don't know if we're going to be invited to comment.
Um, what we've also heard, um,
from people we know in the background is that, um,
west Power is actually at the moment going around
and trying to, so, so one
of our co our concerns was the fact
that they have listed organizations that they consulted
with, that they hadn't actually spoken to since 2008,
when they did their original, um,
when they did their original work
for their original application, which was declined
by the minister in 2019.
And they've now gone back
and been retrospectively trying to consult
with those organizations
because effectively we've called them out on, um, on,
on giving incorrect information, um, into that process.
So there needs to be an avenue within, you know,
we're not just talking about we, we need to assume that,
that there will be some, not all,
there may be some applicants who are trying
to abuse the process.
And we need to make sure that there is a, that there is an,
an avenue to ensure that, that, that, that,
that any approvals for these, for these applications,
especially on public land, um, that,
that there's a robust process around it to make sure that,
that the decisions that are made are made with fair,
adequate, and accurate information.
Because without that, you potentially get applicants
who are using incorrect information
and abusing the process, um, just
to pu push a project through.
And it shouldn't just be about pushing a project through.
It should be making sure
that the correct project is in the correct place.
Look, thank you very much, Megan, for your submission.
We'll have to leave it there
as we have other submitters waiting.
But thank you for your time today.
Thank you very much. And we'll now move on
to our next submitter, who is the Wellington Company.
Welcome, Ian. We can see you there.
Might just like to turn on your audio. Yep.
How's that? Yep, we can hear you.
Welcome to the select committee.
You have 10 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you.
Thank you very much. I, I think I'll be a bit lighter
than, uh, what you had this morning so far.
I just wanna skip through, uh, some thoughts which might
give us, um, a good lens on our consent
application or cavity.
Um, I'd like to start briefly with Singapore,
which is always a good place to start in 1960
to nine to 2024.
I googled it this morning to look up the GD per cap in,
per per capita in 1960.
In Singapore it was $500 a year,
and, uh, in 2024 it got to 90,674, which was
a staggering 180 times bigger in New Zealand.
Ours was 17,780 in 1960,
and in 2024 it was 48,747.
All in today's dollars, I looked it up on the same page.
So they're all relatively correct with each other.
So we grew 2.7 times in the period where they grew
181 times we were wealthy, we had water,
rainwater, forestry, farming, fishing,
a well established society.
They were the size of Lake Topo.
How history has made us look like full speed
and reverse gear is not unrelated to our discussion today.
Company Central was designated
as town center under the district plan.
Um, it is 28 hectares of disused farmland in the,
and represents about 1% of the built area of Kaity
in the middle of a widespread district
that lacks distinguishing features apart from the sea,
the hills, and the dunes that is growing pipes and roads
and houses at a rapid rate.
It is a large population of retired rate payers
and is reluctant to spend,
it grows within an established pattern.
Greenfield infrastructure is estimated by Sense partners
who we do a lot of work with, and $120 per unit,
$120,000 per unit, well
above the conceivable development
contributions that can be charged.
And it leaves a maintenance legacy
that will speed up reverse gear.
Ity Central is a dis is a disused farm, which is watched
a motorway appear right alongside it.
It is comfortable, it is a
comfortable walk to the railway station.
It can accommodate all those things that will allow cavity
to function as a modern, integrated
and prosperous community.
Real intensity, the Singapore way,
our consent needs flexibility.
So the discussion today, I'm not gonna give you anything
technical 'cause that's not my, that's not really my forte,
but our consent needs to be flexible in the sense that
no one can possibly tell what's gonna happen in the
next 10 or 20 years.
You can only improve by the best information you have
and any consent which punishes you for improving or changing
or altering according to circumstance, is extremely, uh,
constricting and not at all helpful to progress.
So the one thing we wanna support is our submission on
allowing, uh, fast track consents to accommodate changes
and positive changes and,
and where absolutely necessary
things that might get smaller.
Um, the analysis, the analysis of our development
by Sense Partners indicated 1,083 new jobs across the
region's economy boost to GDP of $141 million per year,
aeration benefits of half a million dollars per year,
a boost to local hospitality
and retail spending of 33.7 million
and potential greenhouse gas emissions
of $1.2 million a year.
Seems like it would be insane not to do it, maybe
to keep in reverse gear.
We'll just have to take a look at that option.
So I just wanted to throw that into the discussion today
and really answer any questions you may have.
Otherwise you can get on with more technical stuff.
So here I am.
Thank you, Ian for that submission.
Uh, look, we've got a question from Lan Farm.
Ian, thank you so much for your
submission and your thoughts today.
Um, my question was around just the fast track process
itself, but also these amendments and, you know,
because I mean, what, what you're mentioning, um, is sort
of the original intent
and actually common message
of the Fast Track approvals bill Yes.
Where it was about infrastructure, you know,
renewable energy housing, all of that.
But then we have these more quite controversial
and quite complex
and potentially very harmful projects like
mining, for example.
Yes. Um, particularly coal mining and seabed mining.
Do you think those aspects
of Fast Track are essentially hijacking it
and threatening the core premise
and the, the aspects that actually do have a lot
of legitimacy and need, IE you know, our development
as a nation to be able to provide for our citizens?
Um, what are your thoughts on that?
Are those more controversial aspects holding the
fast track back essentially?
Well, it's, it's not fair for me to comment on a,
a mining proposal.
I mean, it's such a complex set of circumstances you need
to judge what the mitigation is, how you repair and fix and,
and, and whether the, the economic impetus is so vital
that you need to have it and the way you rate all that.
But there are sacrifices for sure with everything.
Um, it's such a difficult thing to get, get an order.
I I, I'm not competent to comment
and I can't really, I mean, I, I think there are trade offs
that are worth having and some that aren't.
Um, yeah, I can't.
That's fine. Thanks Ian.
Thank you very much, Ian.
It appears we don't have any further questions.
We appreciate your perspective today
and your submission, so thank you.
Thank you very much. Lovely cheer.
So we will now welcome through our next submitter, uh,
McCullum Brothers Limited.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Yes, Cullum, we can hear you.
We just can't see you. If you, perhaps
I'm getting close Video camera there.
Oh, there we go. Oh, thank you very much.
We can see you and hear you.
You have 10 minutes with us today, so we will hand it over
to you, and I'm sure the members will have some questions.
Um, no, thank you very much for, uh, giving me a chance
to speak, um, our company and our family
and that are very supportive of the Fast Track Act.
Uh, we've been, uh, historically, uh,
under the RMA obviously
and had some probably less than, um, favorable outcomes,
which, uh, certainly not due to a lack of, of, of effort
and, uh, science on our part.
But anyway, that, that's the way it's been.
Um, look at our, our submissions, um, is quite basic.
Um, and I, I'll take that.
You read it, uh, one, one of the, probably one
of the points, um,
and one of the, you know, really important parts of,
of all these applications is, um, the people
or who, who can actually, um, make comments.
And what we've seen in a number
of applications we've done over the years
is certainly there are, you know, interested parties,
you know, ha iwi, councils doc, whoever it might be,
our neighbors, all those sorts of things, uh, people.
But I, I think one of the real
problems is when people who've got actually no effect
to them and have got no knowledge,
or especially no in-depth knowledge of the applications, uh,
can make such a large noise.
And we've seen that and we've seen misinformation,
we've seen all these sorts of things.
So I think this, uh, amendment
to the act actually is a good thing.
Uh, without taking away people's rights, um, they've really,
in, in my mind, they've really got to prove
that they ha have a, an association, um, have a knowledge
and or, you know, have a, um, an effect
or it'll affect them.
Um, but that, that was just the main thing.
Um, but as I say, apart from that,
we welcome the Fast Track Act
to hopefully get some action within the country.
If you have any idea what's happening in Auckland at the
moment, it's incredibly depressed.
There is zero buildings, so to speak, no large commercial
operations or, um, building construction sites.
Certainly no major infrastructure.
And, um, it's the, the city tells around the rest
of the country it's not the same.
That's for sure.
Thank you very much. Callum.
Look, we've got a first question from Priyanka. Can,
Uh, Callum, thank you for your submission.
Um, just a, a very quick question really around your point,
uh, the point that you've made
around transitional provisions
and recommending, uh, that it be included in the bill,
we have heard that from some other submitters as well,
presumably that's
because you've got, um, projects underway currently,
and you are wondering where that fits
with the amendment bill.
Um, but I'm, I'm just wondering a little
bit of clarity around that.
What would a good, what would good transitional, uh,
provisions in the bill look like from your point of view?
Um, from our point of view, we are looking at lodging, um,
middle of next month and,
and we'd hope that the new bills provisions apply
to our application.
But, um, uh, for people who are already in the process, um,
you'd expect to and,
and want that the new provisions would, um, almost trump,
uh, the older provisions if, if that was the case.
And you just want clarity around that in this bill.
Yeah. Yes. Okay. Yes.
So that, that could be quite explicit, would be good.
Thank you.
Thank you, K*m.
I just might take this opportunity to ask a quick question
because, um, it'd be interesting to know kind of the scale
of your business and how many people you employ
and potentially if these projects, uh, were going
to go ahead, how many more people it would enable you
to, uh, employ?
Look, we we're probably down to employing between 30
and 40 people, um, from when we've been busy, um,
extracting sand, probably, you know, 70 to 80 plus.
You know, of course there's all the,
the service providers and people like that.
Um, and we were at one stage doing half
of Auckland's concrete sand,
and that that's dropped right away.
Um, but I, I think it's, it's a project which I think,
uh, LAN was saying.
Um, it's, it's a mining project, well, it's a sea B mining,
but when you actually know the facts
and have done the work, we've spent over two years on this
pro, well, nearly two years on this project, um,
not just consulting iwi, heartburn people,
but also doing a huge number of, um, scientific
and technical reports, uh, which have been peer reviewed.
And so, you know, a lot of the hysteria to do
with CBE mining at the scale we are doing, uh, which is, uh,
you know, it's quite small, really.
Um, it's, it's, it's not warranted.
So I think
that the science we still remember there is science,
and we've got a huge amount of monitoring
and recorded data, um, which we're submitting.
So it's not a big nasty, I promise you.
Thank you. Look, I will go to Lan Farm for a question.
Oh, Tina Callum, thanks for your submission today.
Um, my question was just on your comments around sort
of the voices that might be invited
or not invited to comment.
And you mentioned that, you know,
people should have actual knowledge and,
and essentially be directly affected by the, uh, activity.
Um, do you accept that
because it's like a, a coastal beach process, lots of people
who love those areas are directly affected.
And has there been instances,
because clearly you've been through a lot of, um, you know,
processes and even legal processes with your activities,
have there been instances where actually community knowledge
or expertise has actually helped your understanding in your
business and therefore the outcomes
of the projects that you're trying to undertake?
Oh, oh, definitely. Look, we've, um,
and you know, we've been in, in deep consultation up in,
we're up in Northland, um,
and we've invited particularly the Hapu
and Iwi who have been quite constructive, um, to,
they've gone through all our reports and draft stages,
and so we've modified and,
and modeled everything towards that.
Um, in terms of, uh, the, the problem in terms of some
of the, um, the, you know, some of the people on the beaches
and that, uh, some have been very constructive and,
and have come to public forums, which we've held,
but a lot just don't want to listen.
And, you know, that we find that pretty frustrating.
So if, if we get,
and we've always said to them all, if we,
if you're constructive, we'll listen, if you just want
to be, you know, just, you know, basically destructive
do gonna do very much for us.
Look, thank you very much Callum, uh, for your time today
and, uh, for your submission. We appreciate it.
Thank you very much. Cheers.
Thank you. Bye-bye.
Uh, look, we we'll now welcome
through our next submitter Meridian Energy,
and we can see you there, Humphrey.
Welcome to the Select committee today.
Great, thank you very much. And, uh, and good morning.
Um, look, my name's Humphrey Tap.
I'm the Chief legal Advisor in Environment
Property at Meridian Energy.
And with me today I have Andrew Farin, who is the, uh,
policy planning manager, um, also at Meridian Energy.
Um, look, what we're looking at intending
to do is quickly sort of rat rattle through our submission,
which we made on the 17th of November.
Um, we do a quick intro
and then, then, uh, highlight, uh, three points, uh,
whereby we think there, uh,
could possibly be some tweaks made.
And three of the points that we believe are, uh,
we strongly support.
Uh, as you're aware,
Meridian Energy is a significant developer of, um, uh,
nationally important infrastructure.
Um, uh, and, uh, we are a retailer in that space as well.
We generate around about 30% of the country's electricity.
Um, so that consenting, uh, is in our blood.
Um, and we are well
and truly involved in various applications.
We do have a pipeline of projects, um,
and we are looking at the,
these particular projects addressing, uh,
and transitioning to a low carbon economy.
In response to climate change.
Uh, we strongly support, um, the, uh,
fast track approvals amendment bill, um,
and we actually record that this act one of the catalysts.
If, if we go back to 2021
with the New Zealand Infrastructure Commission, uh,
where they looked at 186 projects, they saw
that the economy was spending 1.29 billion per annum in
relation to consenting matters.
So that's in relation to lawyers and experts, et cetera.
Uh, they also found that, um, uh, from 2014,
the cost of consenting had gone up 70%.
Um, and that when they compared, uh, four cohort, uh,
two cohorts, cohorts of four year periods, uh,
the consenting time had increased 150%.
So that was a sort of the catalyst in the background as to,
uh, why fast track, as we understand was one of, one
of the reasons that it was, um, included.
Now, looking at the bill itself, uh, there are three tweaks
that we believe would strengthen and improve the bill.
Um, the first one is particularly, is actually quite minor,
uh, but the reference to the general policy statement, uh,
we believe that that reference should be captured in 81, uh,
subsection four as opposed to 81 subsection two.
And that's because it attaches to the purpose of the act.
It's a better home for it is,
is all we are saying, um, in that space.
Uh, the second point, second improvement
that we believe is appropriate, uh,
is the reference to lap state.
So at clause 57, which is schedule five,
clause 26, subsection three, at,
at the moment it's two years.
Um, the default in the RMA is five years.
And when you have a multimillion dollar, um, development,
uh, two years is just not, uh, not long enough.
And so we believe that five years is more
appropriate in that space.
And the third improvement is, uh, is a tweak in relation
to the infrastructure, um, upgrades
or improvements that can be imposed by way of condition.
Um, we believe this is more directed towards land
development and subdivision, um,
because there are only certain things that we can do
as an electricity provider.
Um, so we believe that there should be just a little tweak
there, um, and an amendment
of a word from from Will to Cannes.
So the, so the expert panel can still make that decision,
uh, but apply it in a, in a, in a, an appropriate time.
Uh, the three key points in support, uh,
government policy statement, we, we do believe
that is an appropriate vehicle, um,
and it would allow the government to actually, um,
earmark certain areas for improvement in much the same way
as what's happened with, uh, the grocery sector.
Um, we believe, um, that, uh, the renewable electricity, uh,
generators could possibly be, um, considered to,
to fall within a a, a future GPS if
that was considered appropriate.
Uh, we also strongly support all the
efficiency improvements.
Um, so, uh, in relation to, uh,
and it's in paragraph 36 of our submission, uh, we believe
tightening those timeframes, uh, it's a double-edged sword
because you are the applicant, um,
and you have to address all those matters.
Um, and if anyone is put at, um, a cost
or expense that is the applicant, um,
and so the applicant should be able to, um,
make the call in that space.
Um, and then the third point
that we strongly support are the amendments
in relation to the appeal rights.
Um, we believe that the amendments encapsulated, uh,
within the amendment bill are appropriate.
And so that's clarifying, um, uh,
consultation when you're at the referral
stage and who you need to talk to.
It's when a party may be invited to make comments, uh,
because, uh, there's a introduction in relation to ensuring
that you, that the expert panel goes to the council first,
and so that avoids duplication.
And also remember that the expert panel, uh, they,
they can request, uh, expert advice as they feel, uh,
feel fit to do so.
So that avenue is open to them.
Um, and also clause 50, we also support that in relation
to limiting appeal rights.
Um, so they're the three, three improvements, um,
and three areas that we strongly support.
And we're happy to take any questions that you may have.
Thank you, Humphrey.
Look, we'll take the first question from Ryan Hamilton.
Uh, thanks chair. And thank you for the, uh, submission.
I just wanted to draw attention to your, in,
in your submission, you talk about the Lighthouse Joint
Venture and how it's now subject to appeal, um, by Forest
and Bird, and obviously you make a strong case for the,
I guess, strengthening or the limiting of appeal rights.
Yes. Um, do you wanna comment on that
and judicial reviews, uh,
'cause I don't know if you touched on that,
and also what sort
of cost do you think organizations like Forest
and Bird are putting on their economy
because of the delays? Well,
I, look, look, I've got a,
a perfect example at the moment.
So we are enting the hydro scheme, so
that's a direct referral in the environment court.
Uh, we've spent a significant amount of time liaising
with all stakeholders.
Uh, the only party on a three week hearing that was, uh,
it was cut out within two weeks.
But the only party that turned up, uh, that made submissions
and opposition was Forest and Bird.
Um, and this is after, uh, Meridian had reached, uh,
agreements with, uh, department of Conservation, uh,
district council, wacky District Council, McKenzie,
district Council, uh, NZTA, uh, Alps to ocean, uh,
irrigation companies, uh, whitewater rafting, fish
and Game, you name it, Tara.
Oh, and yes. Oh, Tara.
So, so there were, within our legal submissions,
I think there was four pages outlining all the parties
that we had reached an agreement, but it was
'cause of one party, uh, that Meridian needed to go to,
um, utmost expense.
Um, and we, I think from the top of my head,
we called 30 witnesses.
And that application is a controlled activity as well.
Consent must be granted. It can't be turned down.
The only argument is in relation to conditions.
Um, and so this is a proposal,
and I, I guess the ironic thing about it is, uh,
this proposal and what we are putting, putting forward, um,
limits, like we're actually putting,
offering greater environmental compensation
than what we are doing at the moment.
And so we can't actually do these improvements
until the consent is actually granted.
Um, so it's actually costing the environment this delay
as well as New Zealand.
I guess it's a double W irony in that fact
that you guys are owned by the taxpayer
and New Zealand shareholders as well.
Yes, yes.
Thank, thank you. You, uh, we'll just move
to Grant McCallum who's got a question now.
Yeah. Hi. Thanks. Um, earlier on we had, uh,
trans power in here and they were just concerned about the,
uh, obviously you guys are in the business of building, um,
uh, electricity generation
and they're in the business of moving around the country,
and they concerned that applications from the likes
of yourself could force them to build infrastructure.
I mean, how do you view that, that comment?
I presume you've seen their application,
their submission on this?
Look, I, I, I didn't, I didn't see, um, their submission
had time to actually actually review it.
But I guess from Trans power's point of view, um,
there is a significant increase in renewables required, um,
in order to hit Paris obligations, um, by 2050.
Uh, that I see is more of a question of resourcing, um,
as opposed to, um, you know, slowing processes down.
Mm-hmm. Um, by way of legislation.
Um, so if, if I, yeah, if I was transparent,
I would probably be looking to, you know, have,
have more resources to deal with, um, electricity, uh,
generators to ensure
that things can proceed in a timely time, timely fashion. I
Think just, just adding to that, um, as part
of our due diligence and looking at sites
and developing sites,
transmission is a factor we take into account.
And obviously, um, we liaise very closely with, uh,
with, with them to ensure that whatever we develop,
we're gonna be able to connect into something,
otherwise it becomes a pointless exercise. Yeah,
Yeah, Obviously. Thank you.
Thank you. Look, um, it's great
to see all the renewable energy projects that you have, uh,
you know, onboard planned, but,
and it was also great to, uh, turn the switch on Haki, uh,
wind Farm at Tepa Hui about this time last year.
But I suppose what, um, I couldn't believe almost was
that it had taken about 20 years to consent that wind farm
and, uh, two years to build it.
Uh, so it seems in New Zealand,
we really have the balance out of whack if we are going
to bring on more renewable energy.
I mean, is this the biggest barrier
to Meridian at the moment, would you say, in terms
of bringing on more renewable energy as the consenting?
Yeah, absolutely. So la last Thursday we had our, um,
investors, uh, presentation.
Uh, and one of the topics there was fast track.
Um, uh, the delays experience in consenting, um,
costs money and it costs opportunities.
Um, it's from our perspective, it's, it's,
it's what's holding everyone back.
Um, you, you want to, uh, build, uh, as quickly
as you can at the moment.
Um, and everyone's super keen
and there's certainly, uh, a lot of pressure on our end
to get, uh, consenting underway as quickly as possible.
Um, you know, the country really does need it, um,
and it's addressing climate change, um,
you know, it needs to be done.
Absolutely. No, thank you. Thank you very much
for your submission today.
Really appreciate it.
We have met time, so, uh, we will move on.
So thank you. Thank
You. Thanks.
So we now welcome through our next submitter,
Catherine Della Hunt.
Welcome back, Catherine.
You have five minutes with us submitting
as an individual today.
So, uh, we'll hand it over to you for your submission.
I'll call everybody. Thanks. I'm thrilled to be back.
Um, just, just the reason I'm doing a separate submission is
because, um, as an individual,
I've been working in this space not only with the group
that I was with for Watchdog, also as a, as an educator
around Ity ang for 30 years.
And one of the things that has not been said enough
by non-Maori is that this actual bill makes no,
both the fast track and its this amendment,
but make no reference to Titi.
So the fundamental issues about how decisions get made
and who we need to talk to are not address
addressed in the bill.
And consequently, we are, we are making a decision.
The parliament's making a decision that
that doesn't matter anymore.
And I think that's a disgrace.
And although companies may be used to consultation, which
my my dad actually said, can be a cross between a con
and an insult because of the lack of power,
ti is not consultation.
That's not what ti says at all.
So just bear that in mind that when you sign off this,
you are signing off a breach of te
There's an amazing article in it magazine
by Na ri on the topic of sand mining.
'cause I've been watching this morning where they said,
when we won a goal, you,
the government have changed the goalposts.
And so to, to hear these applicants say it's only them
that struggle and only them that pay costs is simply wrong.
UA in order to have proper processes through their
mechanisms, are actually under enormous pressure from the
fast track bill and the fast track bill amendments.
That's my first point.
Secondly, I'd just like to share some quotes about
what is driving this bill.
Certainly we can do things better in this country,
but what's really driving this bill is an ideological
commitment to making sure
that a development at any cost is streamlined.
And I had this conversation directly with Shane Jones
and pointed out to him in our area the lack
of real economic tangible benefit,
because royalties are terrible, um, and risks are high,
and tax is very low, and the jobs are very unstable.
And he just said to me, it's an open economy.
That's his only answer.
It's very clear that
after less than a year of the fast track bill,
we are reviewing the bill
because the minister thinks it's not rubber
stamping fast enough.
And that's incredibly disappointing.
Fundamentally, this bill is about abandoning the idea
of evidence-based robust cross-examination
by independent parties.
And I, I reject the idea that a panel of people
that might have one TWA person
who just gotta represent the whole country,
and a whole lot of people who may
or may not be acceptable
to the applicant under these amendments and
therefore may be removed from panels, can do the job
that people who actually have some really strong
background in environmental issues should be allowed
to be heard as well as development issues.
And in fact, another bill in America, um,
America Australia's going through right now,
and I I wanna quote, um, Bob Brown,
who was the former leader of the Green Party, when he said
that this bill, um, is a,
this commitment is an insult
to the environmental conscience of Australia.
And when we look at history,
I think people are gonna say this about yourselves.
If you're still on the select committee
and rubber stamp this bill
or amend it to make it even more facilitative
of development without the checks
and balances that need to be in place.
And without te even getting a mention, this is
what you'll be tied with.
It's a fundamental issue of what kind
of society you wanna live in.
Whether you wanna live in a society where people
who are directly involved in their communities have anything
of value to offer in terms of public participation,
because you take that away at your peril.
And the question to me every day in, in the groups I work
with is, what are the other political parties gonna do?
We know that National Act are actually committed
to this path, and we know there will be electoral
consequences, and we know
that the other political parties have a choice.
Are you going to make this something
that stays on the books,
or are you prepared to have the conversation about whether
the myth of inquiry being better than RUS robust, um,
cross-examination by independent parties?
Are you cool with that? It's 2025.
Every biological indicator on the planet's on the brink.
We can create jobs by doing a whole lot better than the,
than some of these projects have a have a have a,
I heard someone say, what about a, a traffic light system?
Have a traffic light system.
If this bill was gonna create housing
for people sleeping on the streets, I would fast track that.
I would, I would fast track housing
for people sleeping on the streets if this
bill was gonna ensure that.
But it, there is no connection between those things.
Anyway, I could talk along quite a long time,
so I'm gonna stop now and see if there's any questions.
Thank you, Catherine.
Um, we are gonna have to leave it there
because you have met your quota of time,
which is five minutes today.
But we do appreciate you submitting to the committee
and your passion, uh,
and obviously you were able to submit earlier as well.
So we do appreciate your time.
Thank you very much, Katherine.
Thank you. And I wish you all very well,
but remember that history is watching you on this bill.
It's ideological, it is not actually the experience
of communities who are being wiped out of the record
and where is Kda? Have a good day.
Thank you. Thank you, Catherine.
Uh, now we will introduce our next submitter, Donald Hayes.
Welcome Donald. We can see you there.
Uh, you have five minutes with us,
so we will hand it over to you.
Just want to pop your audio on there, Donald,
so we can hear you.
We can see you there, Donald,
but we just can't quite hear you yet.
So you just need to pop your microphone.
Um, just down, you're just on mute now.
So, um, if you wanted to,
um, just having a little bit of trouble there, Donald,
we still can't hear you.
Um, just perhaps while you, uh, sort out the audio
and the technical difficulties there,
we might just see if our next submitter, um, is available
to come through, which is the New Zealand
Psychological Society.
Just give Donald a minute or two to try
and sort out his technology
and we'll see if we have, uh,
the next submitter perhaps available to, um, come through.
The agenda says they're not due on until 1210.
That's Yeah, that's right. I know,
but they might, they might already be there,
but they, uh, don't appear to be so we will, um,
we will just wait and see if Donald can, um,
You can't hear me at all.
There we go, Donald, we can.
Oh, you can, we can hear you, yes. Oh,
Thank goodness for that.
We've got, I'm sorry.
I'm sorry about that's, I just, that's don't
Understand. That's,
that's okay, Donald, right.
You're, you're with us now, so you've got five minutes
and we'll hand it over to you.
Okay. Okay. My name's Donald Hayes.
Thank you for letting me speak today.
I speak on behalf of my wife and myself.
We are farmers directly affected as adjoining landowners by
an applicant approved one,
the COVID-19 Fast track recovery process.
We believe this, this process allowed the applicant in our
case, horizons Regional Council
to ignore our concerns from the very start.
Under the fast track process,
the regional council received approval
and convert farmland into manmade ponds
to fel rock contaminants.
My family owned a farm next to this council owned land.
We consider ourselves fair
and reasonable people who want the best for our community
and a good environmental outcomes from the beginning.
We are very, we were completely sidelined when we questioned
the project and its environmental impact.
The purpose of the Council's application was
to improve water quality.
However, water quality improvements in this area are far
more complex than the council considered.
They ignored the fact, the, the fact
that they had a legal obligation to clean drains
and surrounding areas to prevent, prevent flooding
of land and houses.
We have experienced flooding as a result
of drains being altered, been altered.
Throughout the fast wrap process.
We felt powerless and continue to, to feel powerless.
We've endured, um, years of stress, sleepless nights
and financial losses just to try to have a voice
and a process that we should have
included us from the start.
This is the human cost of prioritizing speed over fairness
and being Democratic Horizons Project is not a
natural ization project.
It is a stormwater treatment system full of bin,
a fast growing town with no proper storm water management.
This is a complex issue that cannot be solved by rushing
through a consent and the ignoring community
concerns like flooding.
The fast rate process, prop process removes proper
for complex projects that increases the risk of
unforeseen consequences
because the council had council had a narrative they
didn't want to challenge.
Narrow thinking and reduced public engagement will lead
to environmental harm, all of which will cost rate payers
and taxpayers for generations.
The bill must require full economic analysis
of long-term impacts on communities and neighbors.
If we, if there is a efficient risk,
the project should be not appro approved.
This bill will not just speed up projects,
it will speed up mistakes.
We also need a support to participate.
I even have emails from Horizons saying,
I wasn't allowed at all to bring a support person
to a recent discussion on the project.
We asked for one thing, consider the voice of the community,
and ultimately, taxpayers and rate payers land notice
and communities have valuable knowledge to share.
Our experience shows that fast track process can fail people
and communities please address these concerns
so these failures don't become more frequent
and more damaging in this.
Bill. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Donald, for, for
that submission and insight.
Uh, we thank you for your time today
and, um, yeah, appreciate, uh, you getting on top
of the technology there so
that we could hear you. So thank you.
Thank you. You have a good day.
Same to you. So we will now, uh,
welcome our next submitter through three 50 r Tiera.
And just for those following, um, this was a submission
that we've moved from yesterday to today.
So welcome to the select committee today.
Uh, you have 10 minutes with us, so, uh,
we'll hand it over to you.
Kira, uh, thank you so much, Catherine
and thank you committee.
Um, I'm here on behalf of three 50 Al.
We represent a grassroots movement made up of thousands
of New Zealanders working
for climate justice in their communities, uh,
to protect the air we breathe, the water we drink,
and the places that we call home.
And this will bill will, of course, result in approvals
for projects, which will place all three
of these things of these at threat.
It'll place the water, we drink it at fit
because we know that, you know, the Denis
and Plato, for example, mining there would destroy the water
supply of the local town.
It, of course, destroys the p places
that people call home threat.
And of course, also damages the air we breathe through.
We know that air pollution is responsible
for one in 10 deaths in New Zealand.
And coal mining, of course, is part of that.
And so that's why we're making a submission on this bill.
Um, we know the pathway that we need to be on,
and it sure ain't these fast track amendments,
which force ru rust decisions.
It gives corporations the ability to object
to panel members, and it gives ministers Henry,
the eight style powers to amend legislation.
You know, whatever happened to the promises of localization
and decentralization, whatever happened
to letting people on the ground participate in decisions
that poison their town water supply
and alter the course of their lives.
I find it extremely difficult to understand
how local people whose town water supply will,
can be poisoned, have no say,
lose their appeal rights are shut
out, the decision making process.
And then of course, we, from that,
we then see dramatic action being taken.
You know, we saw, um, at a Denison Plato, for example,
with one of the far straight projects is, you know, we saw,
um, produces, um, scale coal buckets.
Um, and then some, some, some people who were supportive
of the mine then ended up, you know, uh,
ended up setting the, the, the vehicles
of environmentalists on fire.
And so we are seeing massive
division in these communities, right?
Whatever you, whatever your view is,
people are not being able to have a view
and they're not able to submit their opinion.
And so they're take, they're taking action to,
of course they're gonna take dramatic
action to protect the places that they love.
And they hold dear, you know,
of course they're gonna do things like that,
whether it be legal or illegal actions.
They've got no other routes available to them, you know,
and then we see this increasing division on the west coast.
We see increasing division in our
communities from this bill.
And so shutting people out doesn't work, especially
for a government that promised decentralization
and promised inclusion in our, in our decision making.
You know, we know that good infrastructure requires
transparency along all steps of the decision making process,
including the diverse communities that call replace home.
And by falsely positioning development in opposition
to heritage ecosystem protections and tei.
You know, these amendments really undermine
our infrastructure pipeline.
The fire check bill was supposed
to be helping us on infrastructure climate.
It's supposed to be providing certainty,
and we've had nothing but uncertainty.
We've had nothing but a bill with a few amendments,
and then suddenly we need to change it again,
and suddenly we need to change it all over again.
We are seeing companies refuse to use the bill
because they've lost their social license for projects.
You know, we are seeing the, the, the mining,
the horrific mining projects that it will enable.
We're seeing the greens, for example, now saying
that they're gonna repeal the, you know, the, the fact
that the repeal projects that have been done,
because they're just so horrific and so terrible.
You know, this bill,
however you look at it, is not providing certainty.
It's not providing infrastructure,
and it's not providing certainty for investors who need
to be building the urgently needed infrastructure.
That we need an RT row, we need public housing, we need, um,
more, you know, public transport infrastructure.
We need all of these things.
We need renewable infrastructure that's community based.
But this fast track bill is undermining all of this,
these continuous amendments
that are making it more and more extreme.
Um, of course, the bill is not about supermarkets,
and it's definitely not about speeding up projects will have
hap which would've happened anyway.
It's about sweeping away decades of law
and regulatory safeguards
and community participation in order to ran through projects
that often communities just don't want.
And I think a great example of, of
what I've just said in this bill was last year, you know,
the, the government proposed three ministers having fund
decision making power, and then tens of thousands
of us organized the March for Nature.
We marched against the bill, you know, 93%
of people submitted against the bill,
and we forced the government
to walk back centralizing the power.
And of course, this bill was sneakily trying to restore
that power again through ministerial centralization.
And you really think that like people are gonna, you know,
be quiet and it's not gonna happen.
It's gonna continue to be up here.
It's gonna continue to stir up division in this country,
and it's gonna continue to
undermine our infrastructure pipeline.
And so, you know, I think the really important thing here is
that we are not only speaking to government mps,
but also to opposition parties.
Because, you know, even if some opposition parties may not
commit to appealing the fast track, you know,
we need the opposition parties to commit
to meaningful amendments.
Um, and if elected, we need the new
government to make projects.
So we do not yet have draft decisions reapply under the
amended application process
because we don't want these terrible projects
to be happening anyway under a new government
who doesn't want to walk back the
things that have been made.
And so I think our submission says, I'm o open to questions,
but really just wanted to make the point
that the fire shuck is
undermining our infrastructure pipeline.
Of course, it's undermining our climate safeguards,
our environmental safeguards, our democratic safeguards, it
safeguards as all the other submitters have been saying,
but it's most definitely not doing,
um, it's purpose in the first place.
I'll stop here for questions. Um, 10 Koto C
Thank you. Look,
we've got a question from Grant McCullum.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um, yeah, good day, Adam.
Um, a question for you, you, you gave us a whole lot
of reasons why you don't think these, this,
the Fast Track bill should keep, um, uh, is a good idea
and list the whole things we should be doing.
Well, some of the things you listed were things like social
housing, renewable energy projects.
Are you aware of the number of social housing
and renewable energy projects
that are actually applicants to the fast track?
Because we need these resources
and we need them sooner rather than later?
Absolutely. Look, we are not in opposition
to the specific projects that are in the fast track process,
but we don't need this process necessarily
to make those projects happen.
Some of those projects are actually undermined,
I would argue, because, you know,
because they're going through a process that's that
that lacks community safeguards,
that doesn't have public input, that, you know,
loses social license along the way,
maybe loses investor confidence if someone
repeals the project and so on.
Um, and so we, we, we don't need a Fire Street projects
that undermined environmental community safeguards
in order for them to happen, right?
It's not the reason why we haven't had
renewable generation in New Zealand.
It's not because it's too hard to get consents.
We've had Meridian sitting on our new consents
for over a decade for new renewables, right?
But they haven't invested in them
because the electricity market is messed up
and there's no incentive for them to build new,
new generation when they, when they give $4
to their shareholders for every $1
that they invest in new generation.
So, I mean, that's a side issue. But my point is,
the key issue here is not that it's too hard to build stuff.
The key issue here is not that, um, that we need
to sideline the community and environmental decisions.
We need these projects anyway.
And the fire just
with something apply just without a good project applies in
a terrible process, doesn't make the process good, right?
Well, actually, the, the, the applicants to this process,
uh, a number of them have said, well, they've been trying
for years to get something done, like build, uh, solar farms
or wind farms, and have been stalled for years and years
and years because of the previous pro, uh, RMA process.
So, I'm sorry, but they, they, the applicants one
who spend the money have got a different view.
But anyway, thank you Madam Chair.
Thanks, grant. And the last comment I'd just make on
that is that, um, you know, maybe there are some amendments
that are needed to the RMA process.
Maybe there are amendments that were needed to,
to labor's, you know, replacements.
But it doesn't go as far as these amendments.
We're talking about this amendment bill right now, right?
Which is about giving the government Henry the eight style
powers to alter legislation, you know, after it's been made.
So just because there's some amendments made,
it doesn't mean it needs to go this far. Thank you.
Uh, thank you Adam.
Look, a quick question from Land Farm,
and then we will have met time.
Thank you,
Adam, thank you so much for your submission today.
Um, my question is,
what do you think it says about this bill
and essentially the lack of rationale for it,
when we heard from the Fast Track panel conveners
themselves, their message to the committee was quote,
to be alert for unintended policy outcomes
and to proceed with caution here.
And they talked about the results
of this amendment bill being that the quality
of some decisions will be very vulnerable to appeal
and judicial review.
Do you have any comments about e even those fundamental
views from the Fast Track panel conveners themselves
And that was made in the submission to this, to this bill?
Yeah, well, absolutely. I think, um, you know,
the Environmental Protection Authority, other experts in how
to run decisions,
and quite clearly this bill is a response
to them running their good process.
You know, like sure, there, there are issues
with the fast track process and the EPA had been running a
process as they saw fit, trying to do as good a job
as they possibly can, you know, and then the,
and then, you know, the government announced these changes
to the bill undermining
effectively what the E P's been doing.
You know, minister Shane Jones has been making many comments
criticizing the EPA, the head of the a PA resigned, um,
you know, and so on.
And so I think it really is effectively undermining public
confidence and, and, and, you know, and experts
and evidence being able to make, you know, make decisions.
And it's completely, um, it's, it's,
there's no thought out rationale for it.
There's been no, there's been no expert evidence
provided, there's no justification given for why we want
to do these things other than the government trying to ram
through, you know, their pet projects
and, you know, influence decisions
at the top of the, the tree.
So I think we really need to be listening
to the warnings from parliamentary ambition
of the environment, the warnings from the EPA, the fact
that the EPA has been trying to run some semblance
of a reasonable process.
And like, I know so many people who have refused to be part
of expert panels because they feel like the
process has no l legitimacy.
And not only that, so we are beginning people, not
so many people are unable to,
you know, refusing to be part of this process.
'cause they feel it has no legitimacy serious, you know,
lawyers who are no, definitely not left wing lawyers.
And then on top of that, you know,
we are now seeing applicants on the, under this new bill,
the applicants are able to just say,
actually this panel member is
reasonably environmentally minded.
We're gonna object to them being part of it at all.
How can we have any seriously good process
that public could have any confidence in when the
applicants, you know, can just, can just ensure
that there's no people there that object them.
And all the expert evidence is completely ignored by,
and governments that give Shane Jones the power to ram
through coal mines that communities don't want.
Look, thank you very much, Adam,
for your submission today, for your passion.
You certainly able to get a lot
of words in there into your submission.
So, uh, appreciate your time today.
Uh, but we have met time and we will need to move on.
So thank you. Thank
You, Catherine.
So we will now, uh, welcome
through New Zealand Psychology Society.
Um, and I believe that we have Iris, uh,
and Brian, uh, coming through.
Uh, Kira, I'm Greg Press.
I'm due slightly later,
but I think I've been promoted,
so I'm happy to go now if that suits.
Uh, okay. Just to clarify, uh, we were, um,
we were scheduled to hear from the New Zealand Psychology
Society, which I believe are waiting
and are next on our schedule.
Um, so we will, we will bring them through.
Um, but perhaps we
just in the essence of time, I'm just having a look.
Look, Elliot, um, I mean, sorry.
Oh, okay, Greg, look, we will, um,
if you can still hear me there, we will,
we will take your submission now since you are ready.
Um, so if you want to just pop back on your audio
and your camera there, welcome
to the select committee this afternoon.
Uh, we will hand it over to you for your submission.
You have five minutes with us
Just, uh, checking my audios. Okay?
Yes. No, very good. Thank you, Greg.
Uh, Kira, I'm Greg Presland.
I'm a member of the Wata Rangers local board,
which is part of Auckland Council.
Uh, we represent the vibrant area west of Central Auckland,
including the magnificent ua, which is the great forest
of, um, professionally.
I'm a lawyer. I've practiced for the last 40 years,
although I don't consider myself to be an RMA specialist.
Um, future time constraints,
the submissions made in my personal capacity rather than a
formal board, um, submission.
Uh, but I have, uh, discussed it with other board members
and Chair Mark Allen, Jessica Rose,
and Michelle likes, uh, fully support this submission.
Um, first comment that I'd like to make is, um, concerning,
uh, undue haste.
Uh, our local board previously opposed the original bill,
and we highlighted a number of issues relating to that.
Uh, we thought that there was undue haste when
that bill was produced, uh,
and, uh, particularly we note
that the original bill was incomplete, uh,
lacked fast track projects in the schedule
until very late in the process.
And that, um, hasty process shown with that bill appears
to be showing, um, the need for this bill as well.
And the feeling of, of being rushed is very strong in terms
of the justification for the bill.
Um, you know that it's to,
or that the reason given is
to create a consenting express lane for new supermarkets
and, uh, aims for streamlining in the process.
Uh, there's only one reference
to grocery in the bill, whoever.
Um, if the intent was to streamline grocery applications,
it could be a much quicker bill and much more concise.
Uh, instead, our concern is that this bill seek
to bolster centralized power, uh,
centralized control over a process
that is already heavily controlled centrally.
Uh, most alarming provision
of the bill in our view is clause five,
which gives the minister power to
issue government policy statements on the benefit
of specific infrastructure projects.
Uh, consultation is limited to fellow ministers
and the public is sidelined
and relative relevant stakeholders are sidelined.
Um, when you compare this particular proposal to
national policy statements under the RMA
or regional policy statements
or coastal policy statements, um, those,
when you develop those proposals, uh, there's broad public
and iwi consultation.
Uh, but with this particular proposal
that board process is not, is not present,
um, this proposal does not appear in the ministerial
briefing papers, uh, that were produced
before the bill was introduced.
And it signifies far more than a mere legal tidying
up if enacted.
It'll give ministers the power to cherry pick projects
for support, and it will reverse the progress
that we've made over the last number
of decades since the time of, I think, big projects
where, uh, decision making was
by extra expert panels and not by politicians.
Um, to further make the situation worse, clause 21
of the bill allows the minister to label some projects
as priorities, and that further seals the fate
of selected projects based on
personal discretion rather than an independent
and professional analysis of the merits.
Uh, these changes will enhance the likelihood of approvals
for handpick projects.
Um, we're concerned about the limitation on
ability to submit.
Um, we consider their troubling currently panels can accept
input from anyone they deem appropriate
under the new amendments.
Panels can only invite comments if local councils opt out
and communities and environmental groups faiths
further exclusion.
And we don't believe that there is justification
for this barrier being made or has been established.
Uh, we are worried about, um, clause 54 of the bill,
which allows the crown to amend Schedule two, uh,
which is the schedule listing government approved projects
through order and Council.
Uh, clearly this is a response to the judicial review case
and the tarran report extension case, uh,
with the court clarified the legislative dis descriptions
that were existing at the time.
Um, my suggestion is Parliament must use clear language
and legislation that can have lasting environmental impacts.
If it gets it wrong, it, it should correct it,
and the executive shall not change parliament's decisions
simply for exp expectancy.
Uh, finally, a comment about timeframes.
Uh, currently local authorities have 20 working days
to respond to applications.
Uh, we take this seriously.
We've had one application in the past involving the previous
fast track legislation,
and we were able to meet that timeframe.
But any reduction in this for projects that
of themselves are almost inevitably complex
and have long scale environmental effects,
we believe is detrimental.
Uh, this is far too short of time
for assessing complex applications.
Um, and to conclude, I would urge the committee not
to support this bill and to,
and, uh, yeah, thank you for the chance to present.
Thank you. Thank you, Greg.
Uh, look, we have met time with your submission.
We've actually gone over time, but we do appreciate, uh,
all the points that you have made today, uh,
and the, the considerations that you've given us.
So, uh, appreciate you also, uh, taking an earlier time slot
to await our next submitters as well.
So thank you. Yeah,
Thank you.
So we now welcome through who we do have online now, uh,
the New Zealand Psychological Society.
Welcome to the Select Committee.
Today, you have 10 minutes with us, so, uh,
we will hand it over to you to, uh,
make your opening remarks.
Kda, can you hear me? I can't turn my video
On. Yes, we can.
We can hear you.
So we have, uh, Rebecca Philippa
and Iris, who we can all see, uh, there.
I can't start my video.
There we go. We can see you Rebecca. Oh,
K, thank you.
Uh,
I'm the for the Psych Society.
Um, I think we have already outlined our concerns
with regards to, uh, this bill.
Uh, namely we are similarly concerned
to the previous speaker with the lack of resource
for Democratic or iwi lead challenges
to be heard on this bill ongoingly.
Um, we, as we identify strongly as clean green Kiwis,
um, this bill massively impacts our way of living
as New Zealand is further impacting on our economy
and contributing to the loss of health professionals
to the international recruitment market,
which we know has been of deep concern.
Uh, given the struggles that we have in our experiencing
in our house services.
Um, there are no protections in this bill,
which opens up potential impact for eco side.
And because vulnerable voices
and vulnerable communities like indigenous communities,
like our Maori community, um, you know, we are contributing
to the potential ongoing harm, uh, and threat to our people
and our wellbeing in particular.
We also know that the impact of natural disaster
as a consequence of climate change is exacerbating new
suicide rates, particularly as they don't see themselves
as having a future in this world.
We also know that suicide rates across all developmental
life stages are increasing exponentially
because people aren't being heard,
which creates a deep sense of hopelessness and helplessness
and powerlessness,
which we've also highlighted in our submission
and some communities impacted by natural disasters.
Suicide rates are so high,
they're not being counted anymore, and we are told it is
because of an increased incentive of doom contributing
to the loss of hope in our world.
The long term financial impact on psychosocial wellbeing due
to the environmental disasters
that we are experiencing is also of importance fiscally.
Uh, we know factually based on the experience
of the earthquakes in Christchurch,
that the long-term cost was psychosocial harm
as a consequence of chronic post-traumatic stress disorder.
We know that was the biggest expense that we experienced in
that environmental disaster.
And if we are contributing to these
using bills like this, then we will see this
increase exponentially, even more than we already are across
our communities as a national representative.
Uh, and as the premier psychological body, uh,
membership body, we have been meeting with our regions.
And what we know, uh, without any shadow of a doubt, is
that the communities most hit by the storms
that we've had recently are struggling.
One with the massive increase in rates of referrals
to see psychologists,
and two, the geographical nature of them being able
to reach into these rural communities,
impoverished communities particularly
to be able to do their jobs.
So we are deeply concerned about the effects
of this bill long term, short term
and medium term with regards
to psychological wellbeing across all of our communities.
We've also been told when we've been traveling out
to the regions about the impact on our farmers,
which we know are high risk anyway,
because of the nature of the isolation of the work.
So we are not just talking about impoverished
or vulnerable communities here, we're talking about all
of our communities and the perpetuation of the loss
of hope is deeply concerning.
Iris, did you want to add to that?
Thank you, Rebecca.
Thank you. I'm sorry we were here on time.
Um, we just couldn't get in, so apologies around that loss.
No, no. Uh, thank you.
We've had a few little technical difficulties, uh,
this afternoon, but, uh, no, thank you very much
for your submission, uh, your insights
and considerations there.
Um, land Farm has got a question for you,
Tina Koto, thank you so much for your submission today.
It's really clear, um, you mentioned in it, um,
alongside the Psychosocial impacts is
when people aren't heard and there's appropriate
and necessary conditions put in place
that projects could likely result in,
you say public reaction and unrest.
And we just heard similar from three 50 when they were
talking about, um, their protest on the Deton Plateau,
feeling like they weren't heard.
Can,
what we would expect from this ev even if it was a perceived
illegitimacy of the decisions made under fast track, what
socially we might expect from things like that
When these events occur.
If I can use the abuse
and care inquiry as an example, uh,
if we aren't acknowledging
and validating the distress
that is occurring in our communities, we will do more harm.
So we have the potential here
to re-traumatize our communities over
and over again, uh, which is what we're seeing,
uh, with moves like this.
Uh, and therefore we become responsible
for causing the harm on top of harm that's already occurred.
That's what you can expect.
That's what caused some of the unrest.
And once people move through a state of hopelessness
and helplessness, they start to get angry.
The likes of what
of which we don't really want to see, to be honest,
because one of our jobs is to try
to keep calm as best as we can.
So we are often called into these different events
to provide specialist expertise to monitor
and reduce the impact of trauma in these events, uh,
and to help to deal with the immediate crisis.
What we know though, is prevention is the best option
for Wau in terms of wellbeing,
and also for if we're investing at the front end,
we don't have to pay for the crisis at the back end.
And that's where a huge amount of our resources being too,
to towards at the moment, which isn't from our perspective
and ideal use of our resource and our expertise.
Look, thank you Rebecca, Philippa and Iris.
And, and also thank you for sharing today
and, um, of course, all of the work that you do
to help the wellbeing of our whanau and our community.
So thank you very much for your time today.
So we will now, uh, welcome through our next submitter
who I just saw pop up.
There we go. Elliot, welcome
to the Select committee this afternoon.
Uh, you have five minutes with us, so we will hand it over
to you for your submission.
Thank you so much for the opportunity today.
Um, I'm Elliot Blythe. I'm a young professional.
I'm working in community led design
and environmental projects,
and I'm desperate for real progress in this country progress
that I feel like I haven't really seen in my lifetime,
but progress that is climate safe
and future proof, not the sort
of short term cut corners version
that this Amen Bill enables.
I'm not anti-development.
I'm excited in theory by a lot
of the projects on the fast track approvals, uh, list,
like the ca and current peak developments
and the housing developments that you mentioned, grant,
as well as the solar and wind installations,
like the one just out Dunedin.
Um, but the fast track progress only works when it's smart
progress and the progress that this bill proposes, I,
I think is not smart.
It's rushed, it's risky,
and it sidelines the people who catch the things
that no one else sees coming.
I used to work as a environmental consultant,
and even in my limited experience there, um, I saw
how the expert advice often reveals the hidden impacts
ecological, cultural, and long-term environmental impacts
that you don't see unless you have these, uh,
experts in, in the room.
And this is advice that, uh,
can slow things down in the short term,
but it prevents far bigger mistakes later on.
I think, um, the fact that the,
for the penalty more than 60 working days
to make recommendations, uh, is only,
can only happen if the applicant, uh, approves.
I think that's ridiculous. That's just not enough time
to understand the ecological and environmental impact.
Uh, we're letting the corporations decide
how much scrutiny their own projects get,
which I, that's ludicrous.
I think, uh, the amendment restricts who even gets to speak.
It narrows the categories of people who panels have
to hear from, which shuts out voices
who should be shaping the decisions
that affect their ecosystems and local communities.
I think that real progress shouldn't fear
this community input.
We've been told that this amendment is
to improve competition between supermarkets, that
that's a part of it, but that feels like such a
blatant Trojan horse to me.
Uh, this process can apply to any industry.
The actual text of the amendment as far as I read it,
and I'm not a lawyer, but as far as I could see, um,
it barely even mentions supermarkets or groceries.
And that means mining heavy extractives
and fossil fuel developments are all pushed through
with lower scrutiny now.
And I'm a clean tech nerd. I own an ev, I bike everywhere.
Um, and I totally understand the impact of, uh, of mining
and the requirement for, for minerals in these technologies.
But this kind of development, uh, is not the kind
that supports the energy transition.
It feels more like legacy extractive industries cashing in
while the guard guardrails are removed.
And to zoom out for a bit, um, I think
around the world we're watching these democratic norms
erode, and this bill feels like it follows
that pattern way too closely for comfort.
It's concentrating power, it's weak, weakening,
independent oversight, and it's rushing decisions silencing
communities and reducing expert input.
And this feels like the stuff that happens at the start
of disaster movies, that if we undermine these democratic
processes now that we won't get them back later
on when we need them most.
I'm 25 years old. Uh,
pretty much everyone I know is thinking about moving
overseas and decisions like this
that ignore the science weakened democracy in favor
short-term economic gains, uh, make
that exit door look wide open.
I want to stay, I want to build my career here,
and I want to be a part of the solutions
that make Alfredo a place that people want to come back to.
Um, but it's hard to say optimistic when this evidence-based
policy is being replaced with short-termism
and ministerial directives.
Uh, my generation is looking at the exit door
because decisions like this make our future
here feel cooked.
Every time I've been in a co-design process, uh,
whether it's for youth or community
or environmental projects,
it's always brought up perspectives
that no one else has anticipated.
And that's the point of participation.
Cutting out these things doesn't speed
things up in any real sense.
I think it just moves the cost
to the future when mistakes are harder
and more expensive to undo.
So I think, uh, we should withdraw
the fast track approvals bill.
Um, and if not, at the very least,
restore genuine public participation, maintain
and strengthen the independent panels, uphold obligations,
keep ministers from issuing political direction
into specific projects.
Remove the ability of applicants
to influence panel membership
and protect scientific cultural
and environmental assessments that make
development resilient in the long run.
The future depends on democracy
and evidence, not on bypassing them.
Thank you so much for your time.
Thank you, Elliot, for that passionate submission.
Look, I will hand over for a question.
We've got time for one from Grant McCullum.
Yeah, thanks. That was a, a very good submission.
Thank you, Elliot. I appreciate your,
um, eff for coming along.
Um, you just, uh, like you,
you talked about the different projects and,
and how you, you know, you're into renewables
and that sort of stuff, which is great.
Mm-hmm. But of course, um, we,
and as, as our, uh, economy transitions to a,
a more renewable based, we've gotta actually still be able
to turn the lights on in the middle of winter when it's
snowing in South Island or whatever.
And that totally does, unfortunately, at this,
as it stands at the moment, require things like coal.
We've gotta, that's one of the legacies of the,
of previous decisions.
So what's your, do you not see the, the challenge there?
I mean, yes, we all want to get to the position
of renewables, more renewables.
Mm-hmm. But in the meantime,
we've still gotta have the lights on.
Yeah. Respectfully, I disagree that we need coal, uh, in,
in our future energy mix.
And I think even in the, in the medium to short term,
I think that, uh, we can replace it with things like, uh,
energy storage and batteries, energy storage
and, uh, vehicle to grid technology, um, as well as, uh,
efficiencies across the board.
So I think that it is, uh, it's possible to move forward
with, without this, without coal.
The experts might give you a different view, mate.
But thanks for your, appreciate your input. Thanks
Jess. Well, thank you very
much, Elliot,
for your submission today.
Uh, we have met time
and, uh, we come to the very end of our four hour, um,
submission briefing.
So, uh, we thank you for being the last submitter
of this block that lots of thanks.
Agree with. And, um, we,
so thank you very much everyone.
Uh, we will, um, adjourn the meeting until 1:00 PM
Sure. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Thank you. Thanks chair.